 
1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 13-00415 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s mother and four 
siblings are citizens and residents of Iran. His answer on a security clearance 
questionnaire was incorrect. His conduct and relationship do not pose personal conduct 
and foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 7, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
security clearance. On December 4, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested 
a hearing. On March 27, 2014, I was assigned the case. On March 27, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing convened on April 14, 2014. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 5 
and Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing 
as did his wife. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. A letter dated April 22, 2014 was received and admitted into the record 
without objection as Ex. D. On April 22, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran) and provided supporting documents to show detail and 
context for those facts. Applicant did not object or agree to the administrative notice 
request.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See the Iranian section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, 
infra, for the facts accepted by administrative notice. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Answer), he admitted all of the factual 
allegations in the SOR, and his admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old senior systems engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since 2005, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Answer, Tr. 
13, 27) In addition to his contractor job, he teaches mathematics classes at the local 
community college. (Ex. 5, Ex. B-3) Applicant called no witnesses other than himself 
and his wife.  
 
 Coworkers state Applicant exhibits excellent technical skills, communication 
skills, professionalism, character, work ethic, and willingness to do whatever it takes to 
get the job accomplished. (Ex. B-1) Applicant is thorough, competent, and professional. 
(Ex. B-2) Applicant “has exhibited the utmost respect and attention for all data 
protection rules and regulations.” (Ex. B-5) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Iran. In 1978, at age 17, he came to the United 
States to obtain an education. (Tr. 25) In 1978, the Shah of Iran fell from power. (Tr. 31) 
 
3 
 
It had been Applicant’s dream since being a young boy to come to the United States, 
obtain his education, and become a productive citizen and role model for his children. 
(Ex. 2, Tr. 33) In Iran, he had spent seven years in a private school learning English. 
(Tr. 33) In 1984, he obtained his Bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and in 1989 
his Master’s degrees in Mathematics and Electrical Engineering. (Ex. 1, 2, Tr. 25) His 
degrees were from the same university in the United States. (Ex. 1) 
   
 Applicant and his wife dated while they were in high school. (Tr. 34) At age 19, a 
year and a half after coming to the United States, he was homesick and returned to 
Iran. (Tr. 34) While there, he married his wife. In May 1981, his wife came to the United 
States where she attended the same university as did Applicant. (Ex. 4, Tr. 26) In 1996, 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen. His wife was also born in Iran and became a U.S. 
citizen on the same day. (Tr. 49) His wife, a micro-biologist, works in the medical field. 
He stated the day he and his wife became U.S. citizens was “the first time we were truly 
free people.” (Ex. D) For Applicant, that day ranks with his wedding day and the days 
his children were born as the best days of his life. (Ex. D) It was a day he had dreamed 
of for a long time. (Tr. 35) 
 
 Applicant’s two children are U.S. citizens having been born in the United States. 
(Tr. 26) After attending university in the United States, his daughter, born in June 1983, 
is in marketing or human resources at a marketing company. (Tr. 36) His son, born in 
1990, works for the same DoD contractor as does Applicant. (Tr. 36) For the past thirty 
five years the United States has been Applicant’s home. He has bank accounts, a 
retirement account, and home in the United States, and has no financial interests in any 
foreign country. 
 
 In 2007, Applicant surrendered his Iranian passport to his company’s security 
personnel. He has renounced all ties with Iran and has no intention of ever returning to 
Iran. (Ex. D, Tr. 27) He believes, as a former Iranian citizen who is now a U.S. citizen, 
he might be subject to possible detention and arrest if he again visited Iran. He has no 
sympathy for the Iranian government. In 2001, he last visited Iran to see his sick mother 
when she was sick following his father’s death. (Tr. 27) Neither Applicant nor his wife 
intends to visit Iran in the future. (Tr. 28) Applicant believes the Iranian government is 
not a good government, but the people of Iran are good people. (Tr. 41) 
 
 Applicant’s mother (age 892), a brother, and two sisters are citizens and 
residents of Iran. (Ex. 1, Tr. 36) His father, who was in the trucking business, is 
deceased. (Tr. 32) He has not told his family in Iran anything about his employment. (Tr. 
29) His mother, who has always been a housewife, became a U.S. registered alien in 
December 2004. (Ex. 4) In 2006, his mother visited him in the United States and stayed 
for a year and a half before returning to her other children in Iran. (Tr. 30, 43) He would 
like his mother to return to the United States, but recognizes her fragile health would 
prevent such a trip. (Tr. 37) His mother no longer recognizes family members and is 
                                                          
2 At the hearing, Applicant stated his mother was 88 or 89 years old. (Tr. 36) In his e-QIP, he gave her 
birthday as August 1928, which he listed as an estimate. (Item 1) 
 
4 
 
also hard of hearing. (Tr. 37) He does not call her because she cannot hear and cannot 
recognize him. During previous calls, she would hand the telephone to someone else in 
the room and ask them to tell her what the person on the telephone was saying. (Tr. 43) 
On his last call to his mother, he spoke to her caregiver and did not speak to his mother. 
(Tr. 50) 
 
 Applicant’s brother is retired from his job in the personnel office of a private, non-
government sponsored university in Iran. (Ex. 4, Tr. 39, 47) Two of his sisters are retired 
teachers and the other worked at a bank many years ago, but has been a housewife for 
the last 25 years. (Ex. 4, Tr. 39) His two oldest sisters are planning to move to the 
Netherlands and to Australia to live with their sons. (Tr. 45, 49) Applicant stated he has 
little contact with his siblings. (Tr. 45) He talks with his siblings every three to six 
months. (Tr. 54) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are both citizens and residents of Iran 
who became registered U.S. aliens in June 1998. (Ex. 4, Tr. 29) His in-laws are unable 
to travel to the United States because his mother-in-law has had three or four 
unsuccessful operations on both knees. (Tr. 43) He typically talks with them once a 
year. (Tr. 44)He last spoke to them the year before last at New Years’ time. (Tr. 44) His 
in-laws have visited the United States three times staying between three and seven 
months each time. (Tr. 44) His wife has two brothers and three sisters who are citizens 
and residents of Iran. (Tr. 38) His sisters-in-law are housewives. (Tr. 47) One sister-in-
law is a widow, another sister-in-law’s husband owns a car dealership, and the other 
sister-in-law is married to Applicant’s brother. (Tr. 47) His wife last visited her family in 
Iran seven years ago. (Tr. 50) She speaks to her parents every month or two. (Tr. 57) 
When Applicant’s wife left Iran one of her brothers was age 5 and one of her sisters was 
age eleven. (Tr. 57) She is not close to these two siblings. (Tr. 57)  
 
 Applicant asserted that should pressure be put on this Iranian siblings, mother, or 
in-laws, the only thing he could do would be to immediately inform his security officers 
of the situation. (Tr. 28, 40, 48, 69) He would follow the instructions and guidance given 
by the security officers. (Tr. 69) He would do nothing to endanger his family in the 
United States. (Tr. 70) Should one of his relatives be taken by the Iranian government, 
there is nothing he as an individual could do. (Tr. 70) 
 
 In November 2001, Applicant spent one week visiting his family in Iran. (Ex. 4) In 
December 2004, he visited his family for eight days in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
because he did not want to enter Iran. (Ex. 4) 
 
 In October 2005, Applicant applied for a top secret security clearance. In an 
August 6, 2008 DOHA decision, Applicant’s request for a security clearance was denied 
due to foreign influence security concerns. (Ex. 3) In September 2013, when Applicant 
was completing his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) 
seeking a secret clearance, he sought the assistance of the senior site security 
specialist as to how he should answer the question in Section 25 concerning 
investigations and clearance record. (Ex. A, Tr. 51) The question asked if Applicant had 
 
5 
 
ever had a security clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended or 
revoked. (Ex. 1) The senior site security specialist told Applicant to answer “no” to the 
question because he had only applied for his top secret clearance in 2005 and not for a 
secret clearance for which he was currently applying. (Ex. A, Tr. 51) He followed the 
advice of the on-site security advisor and answered “no” to the question. (Tr. 51) He 
considered the on-site security advisor to be an expert. (Tr. 53) 
  
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional, theocratic Islamic republic in which Shi’a Muslim clergy 
dominate the key power structures and ultimate political authority is vested in a learned 
religious scholar. Iran engages in clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction (WMD), sponsors international terrorism, intervenes 
in the internal affairs of Iraq and Syria, undermines the Middle East peace process, and 
violates the human rights of the Iranian people. The United States and its allies are 
attempting to block Iran’s goals of obtaining nuclear weapons and other WMD and to 
counter Iran’s efforts to destabilize Iraq and other Middle East countries. Iran has 
sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology. The 
U.S. has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National 
Security Strategy has stated that the United States “may face no greater challenge from 
a single country than from Iran.”  
 
The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor 
of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. The government 
of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against the Iranian 
people. Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. The United States is 
concerned about the possibility that terrorists could eventually obtain WMD from Iran. 
Iran supports terrorists who attack Israel and have encouraged, facilitated and engaged 
in sectarian violence in Iraq. 
 
Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizens, should carefully consider the risks of 
travel in Iran because they are still considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities. 
Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. The Iranian government has harassed and 
detained dual citizens of the United States and Iran.  
 
The Iranian government has a poor human rights record. The Iranian government 
sponsors torture, stoning, amputation and other severe punishments of Iranian citizens. 
Civil liberties in Iran are severely restricted. Abuses include political killings and 
incarceration; summary executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious 
persecution; torture; arbitrary arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary 
confinement; denial of due process; severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, 
assembly, association, movement and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of 
religion; official corruption; violence and legal and societal discrimination against 
women, ethnic and religious minorities, and homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and 
child labor.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
Applicant was born in Iran and came to the United States at age 17. His elderly 
mother, brother, three sisters, and in-laws are citizens and residents of Iran. His mother, 
mother-in-law, and father-in-law are U.S. registered aliens. Due to their ages and 
health, his mother and in-laws are unlikely to return to the United States.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person living in a foreign country 
or who is a citizen of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an Applicant has 
contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
 
8 
 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Iran with the United States, places a significant, but not insurmountable 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with family 
members who are citizens of Iran or living in Iran do not pose a security risk. 
Additionally, Applicant’s relationships with his mother, siblings, and in-laws living in Iran 
raise security concerns.  
 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to protect his family members 
living in Iran from harm, pressure, enticement, or coercion.3 With Iran’s negative human 
rights record, support for terrorism, and the high levels of crime in Iran as well as other 
political, economic and military problems in the country, it is conceivable that anyone 
living in Iran might be targeted by governmental or non-governmental criminal elements 
in an attempt to gather information from the United States. 
 
Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive 
technology from the United States. Applicant’s connections to his family living in Iran 
raise a sufficient concern to require careful scrutiny. An evaluation is necessary about 
any possible desire for him to assist relatives living in Iran by providing sensitive or 
classified information.  
 
Applicant’s contacts with his relatives who are citizens and residents of Iran raise 
the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
apply and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
                                                          
3 An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a much heavier burden to overcome than an 
applicant with relatives living in Germany. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when 
parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR 
Case No. 07-12471 at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (listing numerous recent cases involving U.S. citizens with 
Iranian connections whose clearances were denied, and citing no recent cases where the Appeal Board 
affirmed the grant of a clearance for someone with immediate family members living in Iran). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply; however, AG ¶¶ 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply because 
the U.S. government has not encouraged his involvement with Iranian citizens. 
Applicant has infrequent contact with his mother, siblings, and in-laws. He last talked 
with his in-laws more than a year ago. He talks to his siblings every three to six months. 
He last visited his family in Iran more than 13 years ago. He last visited his family in the 
UAE more than nine years ago. He visited them in the UAE because he did not want to 
enter Iran. His contact with his mother, siblings, and in-laws is infrequent. 
 
Even with infrequent contact, the relationship between mother and son raises a 
concern. However, his mother suffers from dementia and no longer recognizes him. 
When he has called her, she has trouble hearing and will turn the telephone over to 
whoever else is present so they can tell her what the person calling her is saying. On 
his most recent telephone call to his mother, he did not talk with her, but talked with his 
mother’s care giver. Because she does not recognize Applicant his calls are infrequent 
and will become even less frequent.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) applies. His contacts with family members and friends living outside 
the United States are insufficiently frequent to raise the possibility of him being forced to 
choose between the United States and the welfare of his relatives or friends, who are 
citizens of Iran and/or living in Iran. There is little likelihood that his relationships with his 
relatives who are Iranian citizens could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. There is no evidence that his relatives, who are Iranian 
citizens and/or are living Iran are or have been political activist(s), challenging the 
 
10 
 
policies of the Iranian governments. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, or 
the Iranian government have approached or threatened Applicant or his relatives living 
outside the United States for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a 
reduced possibility that his relatives living overseas or Applicant himself would be 
targets for coercion or exploitation. While the government does not have a burden to 
prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant 
would have a very heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S. He established that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. He has lived his adult life in the 
United States. His leaving Iran occurred at the same time the Shah of Iran fell. He came 
to the United States after finishing high school and has lived in the United States for the 
past 35 years. Applicant received his post-secondary education in the United States. 
Applicant, his wife, and children reside in the United States. He has bank accounts, a 
retirement account, and home in the United States, and has no financial interests in any 
foreign country. His employment is in the United States, and he also teaches part time 
at a local community college. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to Iran are less significant than his connections 
to the United States. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient 
to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns. Any residual foreign influence 
security concerns are mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition under AG ¶ 16 is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
11 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government, when applying for a security clearance, 
is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification 
must be deliberate and made with intent to deceive. It is deliberate if it is done 
knowingly and willfully. 
 
When Applicant completed his September 2013 e-QIP, he answered “no” to the 
question asking if he had ever had a security clearance eligibility/access authorization 
denied, suspended or revoked. In an October 2005 DOHA decision his request for a 
security clearance was denied. Applicant denied he intentionally falsified his e-QIP. He 
sought advice from the on-site security specialist, who he considers an expert, on how 
to answer the question. The security specialist informed him he should answer “no” to 
the question because his previous request had been for a top-secret clearance and he 
was now applying for a secret clearance. Even though this was bad advice, Applicant 
was justified in relying on it because it was provided by the on-site security specialist.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully.  
 
Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and listened to his testimony, I find his 
hearing statement to be credible. His answer was not a deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 17 (b) applies. I find 
for him as to personal conduct. The allegation that he deliberately falsified his e-QIP is 
not substantiated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under foreign influence and personal conduct in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
A foreign influence decision concerning Iran must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situations in that country, as well as the dangers existing in them.4 Iran has 
sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology. It has 
very serious economic, military, political, judicial/legal, and social problems. Iran 
sponsors terrorism and is hostile to the United States. If Iran could obtain important 
classified information through threatening Applicant’s relatives living in Iran, it is a 
reasonable possibility that Iranian authorities would take those actions.  
 
Theoretically, Iranian authorities could use Applicant’s mother or siblings to 
attempt to coerce Applicant. Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the United States, especially because the Iranian government engages in 
lawless activities (sponsors terrorism, etc.). Because Iran behaves in a lawless manner, 
the probability is increased that Iran may attempt to harm or pressure Applicant’s 
relatives to gain some kind of advantage over Applicant. Nevertheless, Applicant’s 
relationship with the United States is so much stronger than his relationship with Iran or 
family members living there, I am confident he would inform security authorities of any 
Iranian attempt to obtain classified information from him.  
 
The circumstances militating towards approval of a clearance are more 
significant. Applicant left Iran 35 years ago, just after graduating from high school. He 
has earned his bachelor’s and master’s degrees at a U.S. university. Statements from 
coworkers and friends evidence his dedication, responsibility, professionalism, 
reliability, and active involvement in his community. Although the possibility of attempted 
exploitation of Applicant is relatively low, Applicant’s strong connections to the United 
States and especially to his U.S. community and employment establish “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” See AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
After weighing the evidence of his connections to Iran and to the United States, 
and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of 
mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. He followed the advice he was given 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
13 
 
by his on-site security personnel in completing his e-QIP. The personal conduct security 
concern is also mitigated.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
  Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
