KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with immediate family members in a
foreign country are not casual.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 13-00705.a1
DATE: 06/25/2014
DATE: June 25, 2014
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-00705
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Corey R. Williams, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 12, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of
2
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On March 27, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 41 years old.  She was born and raised
in the Soviet Union.  Her parents were employed by the government in work supporting the defense
of the Soviet Union.  After finishing her schooling, Applicant gave birth to a daughter while
working for the government.  When the Soviet Union collapsed, Applicant decided to leave with her
child and immigrate to the United States.  Shortly after coming to the U.S., Applicant married the
American citizen who had sponsored her efforts to immigrate.  Applicant eventually earned a Ph.D.
degree in the U.S.  She was highly respected professionally and received numerous awards.  She
obtained a U.S. security clearance in 2008.
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002, and acquired a U.S. passport.  She
vacationed in Europe and traveled to Russia to visit relatives using her U.S. passport.  She had a
valid Russian passport but relinquished it before becoming the employee of a U.S. defense
contractor.  Applicant’s mother, father, and brother are residents and citizens of Russia.  Her parents
are retired from government-related positions and they receive Russian government pensions.
Applicant’s brother was employed by a government entity in Russia for 30 years.  Applicant has two
aunts and a niece who are citizens and residents of Russia.  Applicant communicates with her
parents by digital teleconference once a week.  
Russia remains one of the top three most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S.
economic information and technologies.  Beyond collection activities and espionage directed at the
United States, Russia has provided various military and missile technologies to other countries of
security concern, including China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela.  Russian intelligence and security
services continue to target Department of Defense interests in support of Russian security and
foreign policy objectives.  
The Judge reached the following conclusions: A Guideline B decision assessing the security
worthiness of a U.S. citizen with Russian contacts must take into consideration Russia’s aggressive
efforts to collect sensitive U.S. economic and technological information.  Applicant’s contacts with
her parents, and through them with her other family members, raise concerns that she could be
targeted for exploitation, pressure, or coercion by the Russian government in ways that might
threaten U.S. security interests.  The record contains evidence that Applicant’s family might well
come to the attention of Russian authorities and become a means by which she could be subject to
coercion.  It is not possible to conclude that Applicant’s relationships with her Russian family
members would raise conflicts of interest that she would be able to resolve in favor of U.S. interests.
Applicant failed to rebut the Government’s allegations that her relationships and contacts with her
3
family members who are citizens of Russia created a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.  Applicant’s contacts and relationships with these
individuals could force her to choose between loyalty to them and the security interests of the United
States.  Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the foreign influence
adjudicative guideline.  
Given the Judge’s findings, she properly determined that Applicant’s family ties raised
security concerns under Guideline B.  As a result, Applicant bore the burden of persuasion as to
whether she should receive a security clearance.  Applicant was responsible for presenting evidence
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by Applicant or proven by Department
Counsel, and she had the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision.  Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.
Applicant asserts that evidence provided during the hearing mitigates the government’s
concerns under Guideline B such that a reasonable mind would accept that conclusion.  She argues
that although she has relatives in Russia, her life in the United States is more important to her and
there is little likelihood that her relationship with her immediate family would create a risk of
foreign influence or exploitation, and there is no conflict of interest because of her sense of loyalty
and obligation to the U.S.  Applicant states that her relationship with her parents is “casual” even
though they talk once a week.   She also emphasizes that she was granted a security clearance
previously and that circumstances regarding her family have not changed since then.  She argues that
there is no reason for increased concern in her case now simply because there has been a change in
circumstances with Russia.  Applicant’s various arguments fail to establish error.  
In essence, Applicant is challenging the Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions.
After reviewing the Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole, the Board finds no reason to
disturb the Judge’s analysis.  Central to that analysis was the Judge’s finding that both Applicant’s
parents and her brother have ties to the Russian government.  That fact, along with Russia’s posture
as an aggressive intelligence gatherer that specifically targets the U.S., led the Judge to conclude that
Applicant’s significant ties to the U.S. were not sufficient to mitigate the government’s security
concerns.  Applicant’s argument that her relationships with her parents is casual is not persuasive.
There is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant’s contacts with immediate family members in
a foreign country are not casual.  See, ISCR Case No. 04-08870 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2006).
Nothing in this record rebuts that presumption.  The Judge’s conclusions on this point are
sustainable.
Applicant’s arguments regarding her earlier obtaining of a security clearance do not establish
error on the part of the Judge.  Prior decisions to grant or retain a clearance do not undermine the
legal sufficiency of a Judge’s subsequent adverse decision.  “The government is not estopped from
making an adverse clearance decision when there were prior favorable adjudications.”  See ISCR
Case No. 07-17383 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2009).  Moreover, Applicant acknowledges that
circumstances within Russia may well have changed since the prior issuance of her security
clearance.  Changed circumstances within countries, or changed circumstances between countries
4
and the U.S. could certainly provide a basis for treating subsequent adjudications differently.       
  
Applicant cites to decisions by the Hearing Office which, she contends, support her case for
mitigation.  The Board gives these cases due consideration as persuasive authority.  However, they
contain significant factual differences from Applicant’s case.  Nothing in the cases establishes error
on the part of the Judge in this case.  In any event, Hearing Office cases are binding neither on the
Board not other Hearing Office Judges.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10178 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 29,
2013).  
 As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
5
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
