 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 13-00623 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 2012, Applicant received a telephone call from a person who said he was 
Applicant’s cousin (MZ). MZ said that he is a high-ranking military officer in the Afghan 
Army. Applicant reported the telephone call to security and did not attempt to verify the 
caller’s identity. This is the only contact that Applicant had with MZ since 1976. 
Applicant has served honorably as a linguist in a dangerous environment, and he has 
substantial connections to the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are 
mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). (GE 
1) On February 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On March 26, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegation and waived his 
right to a hearing. (HE 3) On April 14, 2014, Department Counsel requested a hearing. 
(Tr. 22) Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 25, 2014. On April 28, 
2014, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing and determine whether or not 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance to 
Applicant. On May 7, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a hearing notice, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for May 28, 2014. Applicant’s hearing 
was held as scheduled using video teleconference. Department Counsel offered six 
exhibits into evidence, which were admitted without objection. (Tr. 22-23; GE 1-6) 
Applicant did not offer any exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 15) Applicant made a statement 
on his own behalf. The transcript was received on June 6, 2014. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by connections to Afghanistan. (Tr. 17-18; Ex. 
I-VI) Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the proffered 
documents, and Department Counsel’s request is granted. (Tr. 18-20) I have also taken 
administrative notice of the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, 
Nov. 28, 2011 and the Afghanistan-related comments of President Obama’s May 28, 
2014 speech to the U.S. Corps of Cadets at West Point, New York because they 
contain information about Afghanistan’s relationship with the United States, and they 
emphasize the U.S. diplomatic and military goals in Afghanistan.1 I provided my 
statement of facts concerning Afghanistan, infra, to the parties (HE 4), and no 
objections were received. (Tr. 18-20, 58-59; HE 4)     
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he provided explanations 
and mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old linguist, who has been employed by a government 
contractor since July 2012. (Tr. 7; GE 1) He was born in Afghanistan, and he graduated 
from high school in Afghanistan in 1971. (Tr. 8, 25) He received his bachelor’s degree in 
Afghanistan in 1977, his master’s degree in Europe in 1979, and his Ph.D. in Europe in 
                                            
1Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod 
v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
1982. (Tr. 7-8, 25) His post-graduate degrees were in engineering fields. (Tr. 8-9) He 
married in 1983, and he was divorced in 1984. (Tr. 9) He married his current spouse in 
1993 in the United States, and his children are ages 15, 17, and 20. (Tr. 9; GE 1) His 
spouse was born in Afghanistan. (GE 1) His spouse and three children are U.S. 
citizens, and they live in the United States. (GE 1) He has not served in the U.S. military 
or any foreign military. (GE 1) Aside from linguist duties on behalf of the U.S. Army, he 
has not returned to Afghanistan after 1978. (GE 3, 5)   
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1982, and he became a U.S. citizen 
in 1988. (Tr. 25-26; GE 1) Applicant’s parents and parents-in-law are deceased. (GE 1) 
His two brothers and five siblings-in-law live in the United States; and one sister and two 
brothers live in Europe. (Tr. 47; GE 1, 6) He talked to his sister living in Europe in 2012, 
after his mother died. (GE 2, 6)  He most recently talked to one of his brothers in 2008, 
and he gave his brother some money in 2009. (Tr. 48) He does not communicate with 
any family members living in Afghanistan. (Tr. 50)     
 
In 2012, Applicant volunteered to be a linguist in Afghanistan. (Tr. 27-28) In April 
2012, Applicant’s mother died. (Tr. 28) Shortly after her death, Applicant received a 
telephone call on his cell phone from someone who said he was offering condolences 
because Applicant’s mother had recently died. (Tr. 28) The caller said he was 
Applicant’s cousin, MZ. (Tr. 28)3 MZ said he was a high-ranking military officer in the 
Afghan Army. (Tr. 28-29) MZ did not ask for any classified information. (Tr. 41) The 
conversation duration was about five minutes. (Tr. 38) Shortly after the telephone 
conversation, Applicant called security, and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
provided a summary of his description of his conversation with MZ. (Tr. 29; GE 3) 
Applicant has not had any subsequent contact with MZ, and he did not take any action 
to verify the identity of the person who called him. (Tr. 30, 53) He had the same cell 
phone from about 2006 to 2012; however, he does not have that cell phone now. (Tr. 
35-37, 41) MZ did not disclose how he obtained Applicant’s cell phone number. (Tr. 40)  
 
Prior to the call in 2012 from MZ, Applicant was acquainted with a cousin with the 
same name as MZ, who lived with Applicant’s immediate family for about 10 years. (Tr. 
32) MZ married and moved out of Applicant’s family home in about 1973. (Tr. 32) 
Applicant’s most recent contact before 2012 with MZ was in 1976. (Tr. 30, 32) MZ is 
about 66 to 70 years old. (Tr. 32, 52) In 1976, Applicant’s cousin MZ was a junior officer 
in the Afghan Army. (Tr. 30)    
  
Character Evidence 
 
  Applicant provided character references from a manager where he works, an 
Army infantry first lieutenant, an Army special forces major, and an Army infantry 
lieutenant colonel.4 The military officers served closely with Applicant for extended 
periods under combat conditions and dangerous circumstances. They described his 
service in Afghanistan as meticulous, precise, intelligent, professional, diligent, calm 
                                            
3 MZ is a very common name in Afghanistan. (Tr. 51-53)  
 
4 The sources for the information in this paragraph are four statements. (GE 2) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
under stress, reliable, and honest. (GE 2) He is “an irreplaceable asset” and a “valuable 
addition” to any team. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal 
activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed any security violations. 
    
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaeda, the “Haqqani Network,” Lakshar-e-Tayyiba (LET), and the Taliban 
continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key 
issues because these terrorist organizations target United States and Afghan interests 
by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage 
taking. During 2012, insider or “green on blue” attacks by Taliban infiltrators or terrorists 
disguised as allied soldiers caused many deaths. At this time, the risk of terrorist 
activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor, 
corruption is widespread, and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the 
U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of 
Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of 
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, 
dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, and to 
prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . [T]he United States plans to 
remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan for the long term.  
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011 at 13. In 2012 
and 2013, the United States had more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to 
any other foreign country. On May 28, 2014, President Obama emphasized the 
importance of Afghanistan to our national security in a speech to the U.S. Corps of 
Cadets at West Point, New York: 
 
We are winding down our war in Afghanistan.  Al Qaeda’s leadership on 
the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan has been decimated, 
and Osama bin Laden is no more.  .  .  .  We need partners to fight 
terrorists alongside us.  And empowering partners is a large part of what 
we have done and what we are currently doing in Afghanistan. . . .   
Together with our allies, America struck huge blows against al Qaeda core 
and pushed back against an insurgency that threatened to overrun the 
country.  But sustaining this progress depends on the ability of Afghans to 
do the job. And that’s why we trained hundreds of thousands of Afghan 
soldiers and police.  Earlier this spring, those forces, those Afghan forces, 
secured an election in which Afghans voted for the first democratic 
transfer of power in their history. And at the end of this year, a new Afghan 
President will be in office and America’s combat mission will be over. 
 
On May 2, 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring 
Strategic Partnership Agreement. This agreement demonstrates the United States’ 
long-term commitment to strengthen Afghanistan’s sovereignty and stability, in support 
of the goal of suppression of terrorism. The United States’ extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to its citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government 
problems developing and complying with the rule of law.  The United States and Afghan 
Governments are in the final process of establishing an agreement that will govern their 
relationships, cooperation, training, and support in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant received a telephone call from a person who said he was Applicant’s 
cousin MZ. MZ told Applicant that he is a high-ranking military officer in the Afghan 
Army. The telephone call’s duration was about five minutes. Applicant believed the 
person who called was his cousin, MZ. The person who called knew that Applicant’s 
mother had recently died.  
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan because 
of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers, and he is 
willing to do so in the future. Hundreds of Afghan linguists, supporting U.S. forces, have 
family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian 
contractors serving in Afghanistan are targets of terrorists or the Taliban, along with 
Afghan civilians who support the Afghan Government and cooperate with coalition 
forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged is counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United 
States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s telephone call and familial relationship with MZ 
creates a potential conflict of interest because MZ contacted Applicant, and MZ is a 
high-ranking officer in the Afghan Army. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of Applicant’s contact with MZ and has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) to 8(c) apply. From 1976 to present, Applicant communicated once 
with MZ for about five minutes. Applicant does not know for certain that MZ is actually in 
the Afghan Army, let alone a high-ranking Afghan Army officer. However, I find that MZ 
is Applicant’s cousin, and he is a high-ranking Afghan Army officer. Nevertheless, there 
is “little likelihood that [Applicant’s relationship with MZ] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.” A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant immigrated to the United 
States in 1982, and he became a U.S. citizen in 1988. His two brothers live in the 
United States. His spouse and three children live in the United States and are U.S. 
citizens. He has five siblings-in-law that live in the United States. Aside from the 5-
minute telephone call from MZ in 2012, he does not communicate with any family 
members living in Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant’s years of support to the U.S. Army in Afghanistan as a linguist, 
including the dangers that service entailed, weigh towards mitigating security concerns. 
Applicant is willing to return to Afghanistan to assist U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous 
combat environment. He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United 
States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the 
United States.   
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with MZ, who lives in Afghanistan 
and is a high-ranking Afghan Army officer. There is no evidence, however, that 
terrorists, criminals, the Afghan Government, or those conducting espionage have 
approached or threatened Applicant or MZ in Afghanistan to coerce Applicant or MZ for 
classified or sensitive information.5 As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant 
or MZ would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. On 
the other hand, Applicant and MZ, like every other resident living in Afghanistan, are 
already at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. 
 
While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of such 
evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower and money in Afghanistan, 
and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in Afghanistan. Applicant and 
MZ are potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add risk to MZ from lawless elements in 
Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not fully apply. The U.S. Government has not 
encouraged Applicant’s involvement with MZ. Applicant reported his contact with MZ. 
However, while Applicant’s timely report of the contact with MZ is another mitigating 
factor supporting approval of Applicant’s access to classified information, it is insufficient 
to fully mitigate all security concerns by itself. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
any interest in property or bank accounts in Afghanistan. However, this mitigating 
condition can only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” All of Applicant’s assets are in the 
United States.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to MZ are relatively insignificant, and his 
connections to the United States are strong. His employment in support of the U.S. 
Government, performance of linguist duties in a combat zone, and over 25 years of U.S. 
citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B raised by his 2012 contact with  
MZ. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are mitigated.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
                                            
5There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
Applicant presented some important evidence weighing towards approval of his 
access to classified information. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1982 more 
than 30 years ago. His two brothers live in the United States. His three children and 
spouse live in the United States and are U.S. citizens. He has five siblings-in-law that 
live in the United States. In 1988, he became a U.S. citizen and took an oath of 
allegiance to the United States. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in 
criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed any security violations. 
 
Applicant provided four letters, establishing his dedication, loyalty, responsibility, 
and trustworthiness supporting the U.S. Army as a linguist in combat operations in 
Afghanistan. One Army officer called him an “irreplaceable asset” to his unit in 
Afghanistan. He served in a U.S. designated combat zone, and he made contributions 
to the U.S. military at personal risk. He is willing to continue to serve in Afghanistan in 
support of U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist, risking his life as part of his duties on behalf 
of the U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. He is fully aware of the risks to himself. All 
these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant does 
not own property in Afghanistan. His past honorable service as a linguist in Afghanistan, 
desire for continued employment as a translator, and oath of allegiance to the United 
States document his loyalty, trustworthiness, and reliability, and they weigh heavily 
towards approval of his security clearance. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.6 Afghanistan is a very dangerous place 
because of violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue 
                                            
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to threaten the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed 
Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan 
Government does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many 
instances. The United States and Afghan Governments are allies in the war on 
terrorism. The United States is committed to the establishment of a free and 
independent Afghan Government. Afghanistan and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence concerns 
are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
