 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01247 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
June 5, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Security concerns were raised under the Guidelines for Foreign Influence, 
Personal Conduct and Financial Considerations. Applicant’s brother and father-in-law 
are residents of Nigeria. Her father is a dual citizen of Nigeria and the United States. 
Her mother is a citizen of Nigeria. Her parents reside in the United States. Her cousin is 
a citizen of Nigeria residing in the United Kingdom. Applicant mitigated the Foreign 
Influence concerns related to her foreign relatives. However, she was unable to mitigate 
the Personal Conduct concerns arising from her falsification of her 2002 and 2013 
security clearance applications and foreign travel using her Nigerian passport after 
being granted a security clearance. Further, Applicant had two delinquent mortgage 
debts totaling $295,717 that remain unresolved. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
March 18, 2013. On December 30, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the 
 
2 
 
guidelines for Foreign Influence, Personal Conduct, and Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on February 13, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on April 15, 2014. A notice of hearing 
was issued to Applicant on April 21, 2014, scheduling a hearing for May 8, 2014. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, called 
five witnesses, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through BB, which were admitted 
into the record without objection. Applicant requested that the record be left open to 
allow her to submit additional evidence and her request was granted. On May 16, 2014, 
Applicant presented additional exhibits, marked AE CC through AE GG. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE CC through AE GG, and they were admitted into the 
record. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
May 16, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Both Department Counsel and Applicant submitted formal requests that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to Nigeria. The requests and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and IV.1 The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact.  
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive, I 
amended the case number on the SOR, 13-12407, to correct a typographical error and 
to accurately reflect the case number of 13-01247.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since January 2006. She has had a security clearance in 
connection with her present and past employment since at least 2003. She is a college 
graduate and obtained a master’s degree in 2002. She is married and has two children, 
ages 5 and 2. (AE G; AE H; AE N; Tr. 75-78.) 
                                                          
1 HE II is a collection of DOHA hearing level decisions that Applicant argues should be persuasive if 
applied in the instant case. HE III is a letter Department Counsel sent Applicant forwarding the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
Applicant is respected for her honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity by her 
family, friends, and professional contacts who testified and wrote letters of support on 
her behalf. Applicant is known for going “above and beyond what is required for every 
assignment” and is detail oriented. Her performance appraisals reflect she is a valued 
employee and exceeds expectations. She has received numerous cash awards, 
appreciation awards, and accomplishment awards from her employer in recognition of 
her exceptional performance. She has worked as a volunteer mentor to high school 
youth, completed a marathon and triathlon, and volunteered in various other 
organizations including her church. (AE I; AE J; AE K; AE N; AE O; AE U; AE Y; AE BB; 
Tr. 35-58, 79-80, 185-187.) 
 
Guideline B 
 
Applicant and two siblings were born in the United States. Her parents were both 
born in Nigeria. In the early 1980s, her family moved back to Nigeria. Applicant testified 
that her parent’s obtained a Nigerian passport for her when she was a minor. She 
attended secondary school in Nigeria, but returned to the United States with her sister in 
1993, at the age of 16. Applicant has resided in the United States since then, though 
she frequently visits Nigeria. She worked full time at a fast-food restaurant to put herself 
through undergraduate school. Her sister continues to reside in the United States. (AE 
N; Tr. 70-73, 80-82.) 
 
Applicant’s parents currently reside in the United States. Her father is a dual 
citizen of both the United States and Nigeria. Her mother is a citizen of Nigeria. 
Applicant’s father retired from his job in Nigeria in 1997 and moved to the United States. 
He works as a civilian for the U.S. Navy. He has never been affiliated with the Nigerian 
government. Applicant’s mother relocated from Nigeria to the United States in late 
March 2014, after she retired from her job in the private sector field of health and safety 
compliance in Nigeria. Applicant’s mother has never worked for the government of 
Nigeria. Her father and mother each maintain residences they inherited from their 
families in Nigeria. (Answer; GE 4; AE U; Tr. 82-83, 163-165.) 
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen of the United States and resides in Lagos, Nigeria. 
He is single and has no children. He lives in the home owned by their mother. He works 
as an accountant at the same private sector health and safety compliance office from 
which Applicant’s mother recently retired. Applicant testified that her brother plans to 
return to the United States eventually after obtaining international work experience, but 
that his return was not imminent. Applicant communicates with her brother by phone 
and email one-to-two times per week. She describes their relationship as “close.” She 
testified that he does not live in an area that the terrorists have been known to target 
and he is not affiliated with the government of Nigeria. (GE 4; Tr. 84-87, 178.) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. Applicant has met 
him twice; on her wedding day in 2007, and after the birth of her son in 2009. Applicant 
communicates with her father-in-law quarterly. Applicant’s husband does not maintain 
relations with his father. Applicant’s mother-in-law is deceased. (Tr. 83-84, 166-167, 
176.) 
 
4 
 
Applicant also has a cousin that is a citizen Nigeria but resides in the United 
Kingdom. Applicant visits him every two years. Applicant last saw her cousin in 2011. 
They have not spoken in “almost a year.” Her cousin was self-employed as a real estate 
agent but recently returned to school. (GE 4; Tr. 87.) 
 
Nigeria is a federal republic that has faced intermittent periods of political turmoil 
and economic crisis. The U.S. Congress has expressed concerns with corruption, 
human rights abuses and the threat of violent extremism in Nigeria. Nigerian security 
forces, particularly the police, have been accused of serious human rights abuses. A 
travel warning issued by the U.S. Department of State on May 6, 2014, warned U.S. 
citizens of the risks of travel to Nigeria. It indicated that, “kidnappings of foreign 
nationals and attacks against Nigerian police forces in Lagos state and the Niger Delta 
region continue to affect personal security for those traveling in these areas.” The latest 
travel warning was issued after Boko Haram, an extremist group based in northeast 
Nigeria that is designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization by the Department of 
State, targeted women and children for kidnapping (including more than 200 school girls 
that were taken from a private school). Boko Haram has also recently detonated 
vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices that resulted in approximately 100 deaths. 
Nigeria and the U.S. have joint operations and partnerships to increase the stability in 
the region and to combat extremists, including cooperating in efforts to aid the missing 
school girls. However, political tensions and violent internal conflict are likely to continue 
in the lead up to Nigeria’s 2015 elections. (HE I; HE IV; AE DD; Tr. 133-135.) 
 
Guideline E 
 
Applicant disclosed on her 2002 and her 2013 e-QIPs that she traveled to Nigeria 
in June to August 1996; December 2001 to January 2002; August 2007 to September 
2007; May 2009; and June 2010 to July 2010 to visit her family in Nigeria. She testified 
that she also traveled to Nigeria in 2005. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 99-100.) 
 
The record contains contradictory evidence about when she possessed and used 
her valid Nigerian passport in connection with her travels. However, it is clear that she 
used her Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria after being granted a secret clearance in 
November 2003. On her 2002 e-QIP, she indicated “no” to Question 15, which asked if 
she had an active passport that was issued by a foreign government. She also denied 
possessing dual citizenship in Question 3 on that e-QIP.  However, on her 2013 e-QIP, 
while she denied possessing dual/multiple citizenships, she disclosed Nigeria issued 
her a passport on August 10, 2012, that would expire August 9, 2017, under Section 10. 
In the notes to Section 10, she explained the passport, “was intended to be used for 
travel in Dec[ember] 2012, but we ended up not going on the trip.” (GE 1; GE 2; AE L.) 
 
During her April 8, 2013 interview with an authorized investigator for the 
Department of Defense, Applicant presented her Nigerian passport for review. She 
claimed that she did not hold citizenship with Nigeria, but was able to hold a Nigerian 
passport due to both of her parent’s Nigerian citizenship. Applicant testified that when 
she completed her 2002 and 2013 e-QIPs, she did not understand the definition of a 
dual citizen, and therefore, incorrectly indicated she did not possess dual and/or 
 
5 
 
multiple citizenships. She indicated that she previously thought a dual citizen was 
someone born in a foreign country and later naturalized as a U.S. citizen. Only after she 
discussed her status with the investigator, she learned she would be considered a dual 
citizen. Her explanations are not credible. (GE 4; Tr. 88-103.) 
 
Applicant was also questioned by the investigator regarding her Nigerian 
passport. On November 22, 2013, Applicant adopted that investigator’s summary and 
indicated the summary accurately reflected the information she provided when she was 
interviewed. Her only additional statement noted her Nigerian passport was “resigned” 
to her employer. The adopted summary indicated the passport Applicant presented 
during the interview was a “renewed passport, but subject reports that her original 
passport was originated possibly sometime in 1982 by her parents, at a time when 
subject was only a child.” Applicant reported that “between the years 1993 to 2011, she 
has used this foreign passport 8-10 times to travel to and from Nigeria.” She further 
reported, “that she has always used her foreign passport when traveling to Nigeria.” (GE 
4.) 
 
However, in her Answer and in her testimony, Applicant asserted that her 
answers to the investigator were unintentionally incomplete because she did not have 
documentation of her travel to reference during the interview. She testified that her 
Nigerian passport expired in approximately 1987 or 1988. She claimed it had not been 
renewed at the time she completed her e-QIP in 2002. She testified that she first 
renewed the Nigerian passport for a trip she took in 2005. She used her U.S. passport 
to travel to Nigeria in 1996 and during her 2001 to 2002 visit. She used the Nigerian 
passport for her trips to Nigeria from 2005 until the passport was surrendered to her 
security office and subsequently destroyed in July 2013. She presented no 
documentation to support her new claims regarding the more limited use of her Nigerian 
passport. Her contradictory statements indicate that she has not been fully forthright 
with the government concerning her possession and use of her Nigerian passport. (GE 
3; AE P; AE EE; Tr. 88-103, 167-174.) 
 
Guideline F 
 
Under the Financial Considerations guideline, the Government alleged that 
Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she made financial decisions that indicate 
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all 
of which raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. The SOR identified two delinquent debts totaling $295,717. 
Applicant’s debts appear in credit reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted all 
of the debts as alleged in subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b. (Answer; GE 7; GE 9; GE 12; GE 
14.) 
 
Applicant attributes her financial delinquencies to her investment in a rental 
property and the subsequent decline in the real estate market. Prior to the purchase of 
the rental property, she had excellent credit and had been successful in renting out 
another investment property. She purchased the property in question for approximately 
$310,000 in 2006. She financed the purchase with a 30-year fixed interest rate primary 
 
6 
 
mortgage of $230,000 and a 10-year home equity line of credit (HELOC) loan of 
$80,000. Both loans were made by the same financial institution and were delinquent in 
the amounts of $64,380 and $57,717, as stated in SOR allegations 3.a and 3.b. She 
rented the property after approximately three months, during which she completed 
some upgrades in the house. For the first few months, she made a profit with the rental. 
However, due to maintenance issues and high utility costs, the rental income was 
insufficient to cover her costs associated with the property. Additionally, Applicant’s 
tenants damaged the property and stopped paying rent. She testified that after the 
tenants finally vacated the home, approximately $25,000 in repairs were required to 
make the home habitable again. She was unable to afford the repairs. As a result, the 
home sat vacant. (GE 4; GE 5; AE M; AE N; AE R; Tr. 73-74, 103-117, 136-150.) 
 
Applicant stopped making payments on these mortgages in December 2010 after 
she decided that she had already spent approximately $30,000 of her own money on 
maintaining the mortgage and the property. She continued making mortgage payments 
long after her tenants stopped paying rent, but eventually she made “a decision to say 
this is a loss, and I’m going to take my losses and walk away.” She continued, “I had a 
debt that I was willing to satisfy according to my financial needs.” However, she 
prioritized saving for her retirement and providing for her children. She documented that 
she tried to resolve the mortgages after she stopped making payments by listing the 
property with a real estate agent for sale, attempting to refinance the mortgage, and 
offering the bank a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Applicant presented documentation that 
showed she was in constant communication with financial institution that gave her the 
loans. (GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE Q; AE AA; Tr. 73-74, 
103-117, 178.) 
 
In 2013 Applicant received notice from the city where the home was located that 
it was a safety hazard. She claims she did not receive notice that the city planned to sell 
the property. However, on October 30, 2013, the city sold the property for $20,000. On 
March 24, 2014, Applicant received a final accounting from the city documenting the 
sale. Applicant testified that her lending institution was not aware of the sale of the 
property until recently. At this time, Applicant does not know if her mortgage debts will 
be collected, cancelled, or forgiven. However, she plans to continue to stay in contact 
with the lender until they are resolved. (AE CC; AE FF; Tr. 110-117.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement, completed February 13, 2014, shows 
her family’s total net monthly income is $9,183. She indicated she had a monthly 
remainder of $206. A proposed budget analysis completed for Applicant on February 5, 
2014, by a consumer credit counseling organization suggested she cut her monthly 
spending from her current level of $8,674 per month to $6,044 per month. It also 
showed that her expenses exceeded her income by $1,374 per month. Applicant failed 
to explain this discrepancy, or whether she took action on the recommended spending 
cuts. (AE E; AE S; AE T; AE V; Tr. 118.) 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $109,500. Applicant’s assets include two 401(k) 
savings plans that total $230,000. Her other rental property is valued at $278,000, but 
her outstanding balance on that mortgage is $220,089. She had formal financial 
 
7 
 
counseling in February 2014. She was advised to discuss her options with a bankruptcy 
attorney if the bank did not accept a deed in lieu of foreclosure on her rental property 
that was subsequently ceased by the city.2 (AE E; AE F; AE S; AE T; AE W; AE X; AE 
Z; Tr. 118-125, 152-154.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. The 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
2 Applicant lives in a home owned solely by her husband. She testified she had a prenuptial agreement 
with respect to his sole ownership of that property. (Tr.135.) 
 
8 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following conditions are potentially applicable. 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen of the United States and resides in Nigeria. Her 
father-in-law is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. Applicant’s mother is a citizen of 
Nigeria and her father is a dual citizen of Nigeria and the United States. They now 
reside in the United States. Her cousin is a citizen of Nigeria residing in the United 
Kingdom. Applicant maintains contact and strong connections with all of her foreign 
relatives. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), require both the presence of 
foreign contacts and a heightened risk. I find there is sufficient evidence regarding 
terrorist activities in Nigeria and the Nigerian government’s human rights abuses to 
establish a heightened risk. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Four are 
potentially applicable. 
 
9 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has lived in the U.S. for the majority of her life. Her limited assets are in 
the U.S. Her husband is a U.S. citizen. Her children were born in the U.S. and are U.S. 
citizens. She is actively involved in many volunteer organizations in her community. Her 
parents both reside in the United States. She has limited contact with her father-in-law. 
Her contact with her cousin that resides in the United Kingdom with Nigerian citizenship 
is also limited. She is close to her brother that resides in Nigeria, but it is unlikely the 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of her 
brother and the interests of the U.S., despite the fact that he lives in Lagos, because he 
is not involved with the Nigerian government and lives away from the area that the 
terrorists target. Further, if such conflict somehow did arise, Applicant has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that any conflict would be 
resolved in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply to all of Applicant’s 
foreign relatives. AG ¶ 8(c) applies to applicant’s father-in-law only. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
10 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant’s false answers to Question 3 and Question 10 on her February 27, 
2002 e-QIP, and to Section 10 on her March 18, 2013 e-QIP, raise security concerns. 
On both of these documents, she indicated she did not possess dual citizenship. On her 
February 2002 e-QIP, she failed to disclose she possessed an active Nigerian passport. 
She admitted to an investigator that she had been issued a Nigerian passport in 1982 
and that she always used her Nigerian passport when traveling to Nigeria. Therefore, 
she presumably traveled to Nigeria in June to August 1996; December 2001 to January 
2002; August 2007 to September 2007; May 2009; and June 2010 to July 2010 using 
her Nigerian passport. She did not retract her statement about always using her 
Nigerian passport until after receiving the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a highly educated and articulate woman. She has a job that requires 
her to pay close attention to detail. Her contention that her omissions of her dual 
citizenship were due to a misunderstanding of the definition of dual or multiple 
citizenship is not persuasive, particularly after she obtained and used multiple Nigerian 
passports.  
 
 Further, she had possession of her Nigerian passport when she was interviewed 
by the Government investigator and referenced it as a resource during that interview. 
She later had the opportunity to review her statement and chose to adopt it without any 
changes. She failed to provide any documentary evidence to support her hearing 
testimony, in which she claimed that after receiving the SOR she reviewed unspecified 
records and found errors in her adopted statement concerning when she obtained the 
Nigerian passport. AG ¶ 16(a) is disqualifying. 
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) also applies. Despite the fact that Applicant was a U.S. citizen and 
possessed a security clearance granted by the Department of Defense, she used her 
Nigerian passport for travel to and from Nigeria in preference to her U.S. passport.  
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
11 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were fully established in this case. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith 
efforts to correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no information that 
indicates she was ill-advised on the security clearance process. Falsifying material 
information is a serious offense and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar 
lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, she failed to take responsibility for her 
actions and continued to assert that her errors were inadvertent. Her Nigerian passport 
has been destroyed, which is a positive step toward mitigation. However, overall she 
has not provided sufficient evidence to meet her burden of proof to mitigate her 
personal conduct.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
12 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred two delinquent debts totaling $295,717. 
The debts have been delinquent since 2010. The evidence shows Applicant’s “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy” her mortgages. She has  a four-year “history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 In this case, the economic downturn in the real estate market, high utilities, 
damages to her property, and the failure of her tenant to pay rent, were all events 
beyond Applicant’s control, which contributed to her financial difficulties. However, she 
admits that she made a decision to take a loss and stopped paying her mortgages 
because she wanted to spend her funds on things she prioritized higher than her 
mortgage obligations. She has been in contact with the financial institution that holds 
both of her delinquent mortgages. She listed the property with a real estate agent for 
sale, attempted to refinance the mortgage, and offered the bank a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure. These actions show some responsibility in addressing her delinquencies. 
However, she failed to maintain the property in the meantime, and the city has sold the 
property. Her debts are now unsecured and she is unsure how they will be resolved. 
She has no concrete plan to address her delinquencies. Further, there is evidence that 
her current expenses exceed her income. Her financial problems are ongoing and there 
are no clear indications her problems are under control, despite her participation in 
 
13 
 
financial counseling. While Applicant receives some credit for the mitigating evidence in 
the record, it is not sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by her conduct. 
 
The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”3 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”4 
Applicant’s ongoing decision to “take [her] losses and walk away” reflects poorly on her 
current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
I cannot find that financial problems are unlikely to recur. She has not established that 
the problem is being resolved or is under control, or that she made a good faith effort to 
repay her remaining delinquent accounts. None of the mitigating conditions were 
sufficiently established by the record evidence. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and dedicated employee who performs well on the 
job. She has received recognition for her exceptional work through awards from her 
employer. She is active in her church and community. However, she has not been 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
4 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
14 
 
forthright with the Government concerning her Nigerian citizenship and passport. She 
also has not acted responsibly with respect to her delinquent mortgages. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Personal Conduct or Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude she mitigated the Foreign Influence security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
15 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
