 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No.: 13-01076 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 21, 2010, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Position 
(SF-85P). On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated reply. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on February 10, 2014. The case was originally assigned to another 
 
2 
 
 
administrative judge on March 10, 2014, and a hearing scheduled for April 1, 2014 was 
cancelled at Applicant’s request. The case was reassigned to me on April 9, 2014. 
DOHA issued a second notice of hearing on April 17, 2014, rescheduling the hearing on 
May 13, 2014. On April 24, 2014, DOHA issued a third notice of hearing and the hearing 
was held on May 15, 2014. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received into 
evidence without objection. 
 
I held the record open until June 4, 2014, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant did not submit any post-hearing documents. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 23, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted 4 of the 17 debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1. f. and 1.n) alleged 
under financial considerations and denied the remaining 13 debts alleged. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old information technology triage specialist, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since June 2006. He seeks a position of public trust 
to enhance his position within his company. (GE 1, Tr. 15-18, 59.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 2000. He attended college from 
December 2007 to January 2009, but did not earn a degree. Applicant estimates that he 
is “about a semester short of getting my associate’s” in electrical engineering. (GE 1, Tr. 
18-20.) He served in the Navy Reserve from July 2001 to May 2002, and was honorably 
discharged under medical conditions as a Seaman Apprentice (pay grade E-2). (GE 1, 
Tr. 20-22.) 
 
Applicant married in June 2006, and has a four-year-old daughter. He has two 
other children from two separate relationships – a 14-year-old son and a 12-year-old 
daughter. Applicant pays monthly child support of $240 and $360, respectively, to the 
mothers of his non-custodial children. His wife is employed full time as a training 
manager for a cable company. (GE 1, Tr. 22-26.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 17 debts totaling $31,770. The debts include charged-off and 
collection debts in varying amounts ranging from $50 to $8,859. Applicant attributes his 
financial difficulties to being unemployed from May 2005 to December 2005 and not 
having enough income to meet family bills. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that his two student loans for $8,859 and $6,396 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.n) are consolidated and in deferment. His February 2014 credit report 
substantiates this claim. Also, the same credit report reflects a zero balance on the 
$5,000 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.d) and the $1,119 debt to the U.S. Government 
(SOR ¶ 1.f).  Applicant also claimed that he was the victim of identity theft with regard to 
the $406 cable bill collection account (SOR ¶ 1.c). He provided a copy of a police report 
wherein he reported that he was an identity theft victim to substantiate this claim. Apart 
from those five SOR debts, Applicant was unable or unwilling to provide documentation 
of payment or resolution for the remaining 12 debts.1 Applicant has not sought financial 
counseling. (Tr. 27-49.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement reflects that his gross monthly salary is 
$4,300 and his wife’s gross monthly salary is $3,000. After deductions, his net monthly 
remainder is a negative $250. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had “about a 
hundred dollars” in his checking account and no money in his savings account. He 
reported he had $10,000 in his 401(k) account and “no idea” how much money his wife 
had in her checking and savings accounts. Applicant stated that his wife pays the bills. 
He also stated that he cuts lawns to earn extra money. Applicant filed his federal and 
state income tax forms and owes $800 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and 
received a $12 refund from the state. He claimed that he made payment arrangements 
with the IRS and would provide that documentation post-hearing. Applicant stated that 
should he be granted a public trust position, he would be eligible for enhanced work 
responsibilities and a pay increase and would be in a better position to pay off his debts. 
He is current on his child support obligations for his two children. (GE 2, Tr. 49-57.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant testified that in addition receiving his five-year work anniversary award, 
his manager acknowledged his favorable customer satisfaction surveys and production 
levels. He stated that his evaluations were rated as “exceeds expectations.” (Tr. 58.) 
See fn. 1. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
                                            
1
 As noted supra, I held the record open until June 4, 2014, to provide Applicant with an 
opportunity to submit additional documents, which would have included proof of payment or resolution of 
debts, proof of having sought financial counseling, work evaluations, awards, letters of recommendation, 
etc. He did not submit any additional documents. (Tr. 60-63, 69-70.) 
 
4 
 
 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right 
to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
Id. (internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented by his 
admissions as well as by his credit reports. Applicant’s SOR lists 17 delinquent debts 
totaling $31,770. Applicant has mitigated five of those debts, discussed infra, leaving 
the remaining 12 debts unresolved. The majority of his debts have been delinquent for 
several years or more. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant is able to receive 
partial credit under AG ¶ 20(d) for debts listed under SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.n as 
well as partial credit under AG ¶ 20(e) for the debt listed under SOR ¶ 1.c.  If Applicant 
resolved or disputed his debts as he claimed, he did not provide documentation of 
same. His debts remain listed on his credit reports. There is no evidence in the record 
that satisfactorily mitigates the remaining debts alleged. Absent such evidence, I am 
unable to fully apply mitigating conditions under this concern and find against Applicant 
on this concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant access to sensitive information must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
                                            
2
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. To Applicant’s credit, he honorably served briefly in the 
Navy Reserve and has successfully held a job with his current defense contractor 
employer for eight years. Also to his credit, he is current on his child support obligations 
for his two non-custodial children.  
 
However, I cannot overlook his history of financial irresponsibility. After the 
Government put Applicant on notice that his finances were a concern, he failed to take 
appropriate corrective action. Even after being given additional time to provide 
mitigating evidence after the record closed, he failed to engage further in the process. I 
can only conclude that Applicant is unable or unwilling to take the necessary steps to 
regain financial responsibility. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, 
and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he 
has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
