 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 13-01321 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 3, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 14, 2014. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on April 7, 2014. The case was assigned to me on April 9, 2014. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 17, 2014, scheduling the hearing for May 
 
2 
 
 
14, 2014. On April 24, 2014, DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing 
rescheduling the case for May 16, 2014. The hearing was held as rescheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
GE 4, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were received into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE O, which were 
received into evidence without objection.  
 
I held the record open until June 4, 2014, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted AE P and AE Q, which were 
received into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on May 27, 2014. The record closed on June 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d, and denied 
1.b and 1.c. He provided explanations for his admissions and denials. Applicant’s 
answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old president and former chairman of the board and chief 
executive of a company with major defense contracts. As an officer of that company 
with significant responsibility, he requires a security clearance to effectively discharge 
his duties. Applicant is a first-time applicant for a security clearance. (GE 1, Tr. 14-16.) 
He has been with his company since January 2013. (AE G, AE H, Tr. 19-22, 65.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1983. He was awarded a 
bachelor of arts degree in economics in June 1986. (GE 1, Tr. 16-17.) Applicant was 
previously married from May 1987 to July 2004. That marriage ended by divorce. 
Applicant remarried in April 2005. Applicant has a 20-year-old son and a 19-year-old 
daughter from his previous marriage, and an 8-year-old son from his current marriage. 
He shares college costs for his two oldest children with his former spouse. (GE 1, Tr. 
17-19.) Applicant’s current spouse is employed full-time as director of design for a 
biking apparel company. (Tr. 19, 54-55.) Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. 
(GE 1, Tr. 22.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges four separate debts totaling $60,559 – a $51,139 
charged-off mortgage debt, a $418 security service collection account, a $304 medical 
collection account, and an $8,698 past-due mortgage account. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d.) 
 
  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to the decline in the economy that 
occurred after the 2007 market crash. He was making a six-figure income as an 
investment banker up until then and subsequently was unemployed for about four 
years. Applicant went from a six-figure income to a three-year negative income in the 
years 2008, 2009, and 2010. As a result, he was forced to live off his savings and 
cash in his IRA to meet his living expenses. Before the 2007 crash, Applicant had 
enjoyed excellent credit and was current on his bills. Three years of negative income 
prompted his SOR debts and a decline in his credit rating. In 2011, Applicant’s 
financial situation began to improve, and as of January 2013, he has regained his 
financial footing when he regained full-time employment. He considered bankruptcy, 
but decided against it because he wanted to repay his creditors. (Tr. 22-25, 50-52, 63-
64, AE F.) 
 
Applicant provided documentation that he has settled and paid all four 
accounts. After his debts became delinquent, Applicant remained in contact with his 
creditors. (SOR answer, AE A – AE D, AE O, AE P, AE Q; Tr. 29-48, 59-61.) His 
September 2013 personal financial statement reflects a monthly gross salary for 
Applicant and his wife at $18,680, and a net monthly remainder of $12,773. His home 
is appraised at $1,500,000, and he has substantial savings, stocks, and bonds. (GE 2, 
AE I - AE L, Tr. 48, 56, 66-68.) Applicant’s May 2014 credit report shows that all of his 
accounts are current and in good standing. (AE E.) He is current on all of his state and 
federal taxes. (Tr. 57-59.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted two work-related reference letters from company officers. 
Both letters are from senior executives and discuss his professionalism, knowledge, 
and support and counsel. They view Applicant’s current and future contribution as a 
key to their company success. His references also note his overall contribution to the 
national defense and strongly recommend him for a security clearance. (AE M, AE N, 
Tr. 68.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s sustained an almost 
four-year period of unemployment following the 2007 market crash. Since regaining 
full employment in January 2013, he has settled and paid all of his SOR debts. To 
Applicant’s credit, he remained in contact with his creditors during this process.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. Applicant’s budget does, however, demonstrate 
that he is living within his means and has regained financial responsibility. Applicant 
produced ample documentation to warrant full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant 
has settled and paid all of his debts.  AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s service as a defense contractor weighs in his favor. He is a law-
abiding citizen and is a productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day 
expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been fully mitigated. After 
having had an opportunity to observe Applicant, assess his credibility, and consider 
the steps he has taken to regain financial responsibility, he has done all that could be 
expected. Applicant honored his obligations rather than “walking away” from them.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a defense 
contractor, his efforts to resolve his financial situation, his potential for future service 
as a defense contractor, the mature and responsible manner in which he dealt with his 
adverse situation, his reference letters, and his testimony and demeanor. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. 
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
