 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 13-00934 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1997, continues to exercise Greek 
citizenship and possesses a valid Greek passport. His scant evidence is insufficient to 
show he does not have divided loyalties, and that he is not subject to possible foreign 
manipulation. Additionally, he has a large unresolved debt and failed to establish 
financial responsibility. Applicant’s financial situation, foreign preference, and foreign 
influence raise trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility to hold a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for a position of trust 
(Application) on April 25, 2013. On October 9, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) listing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference), 
Guideline B (foreign influence), and Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant 
                                            
1 The DoD acted under Executive Order 12968, Access to Classified Information (August 2, 
1995), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
answered the SOR on November 25, 2013 (Answer), and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to him 
by transmittal letter dated February 19, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on February 
27, 2014. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant’s response was due on March 29, 
2014. He did not respond. The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 
3.a through 3.d, 3.f, 3.g, 3.j, and 3.l through 3.o. Concerning the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
3.e, 3.h, 3.i, and 3.k, Applicant admitted it is possible he owes these debts, but indicated 
that he did not recognize these charges and intended to investigate them. I considered 
these four SOR allegations denied. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, including his Application, his answers to 
the SOR, his June 2013 interview, and his credit reports, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a government contractor. He was born in 
Greece, and entered the United States as a foreign exchange student in 1985. He 
graduated from a U.S. high school in May 1986; received a bachelor’s degree in 
December 1989, and later pursued a master’s degree, but did not complete it. He 
completed a computer trade school certificate in 1999. Applicant married in 1992 and 
divorced in May 2007. He has a 17-year-old daughter of this relationship. He lived with 
his fiancé starting in February 2011. In 2012, he married his fiancé in Greece in an 
unofficial religious ceremony for his parent’s benefit. He intends to officially marry his 
wife in the United Stated in the near future. 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 1997 for his then wife’s 
benefit. He wanted to stay longer in the United States without having to renew his 
residency card. He was issued his current U.S. passport in February 2005, which will 
not expire until February 2015. 
 
Applicant’s parents and siblings (a brother and sister) are citizens and residents 
of Greece. Applicant’s father is 86 years old, and his mother is 75, both are retired. His 
brother is 47 and unemployed. His sister is 49 years old and works as a high school 
music teacher. He has monthly telephone contact with his relatives in Greece and has 
frequently traveled to Greece to visit with his family. He travelled to Greece in 2003, 
2005, 2006, 2007, and 2012. On these occasions, he stayed in Greece for periods of 15 
to 30 days. Additionally, Applicant moved to Greece and lived with his parents from 
                                                                                                                                            
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
March 2009 through February 2011. He also travelled to Denmark with his fiancé for 
tourism in 2010.  
 
Applicant‘s work history indicates that he was employed from January 2000 to 
April 2004; unemployed from April 2004 to August 2004; employed from October 2004 
to March 2009; unemployed from March 2009 to July 2009; and unemployed from 
December 2010 to June 2011. He has been working for his current employer, a 
government contractor, since June 2011. This is his first application for a position of 
trust. 
 
When Applicant was laid off from his job in March 2009, he travelled to Greece to 
be with his parents because his father was having health problems. While in Greece, he 
lived in an apartment rented by his parents for him, and he worked for a Greek company 
from July 2009 until June 2011. Applicant served in the Greek army from March 2009 
until September 2009. He stated that as a Greek citizen, he was legally required to 
comply with his mandatory military service obligation. Applicant did not register for the 
U.S. Selective Service System in 1987, because he was not a U.S. citizen. He did not 
register after he became a U.S. citizen in 1997. He has never served in the U.S. 
military. 
 
Applicant has possessed a Greek passport since he entered the United States in 
1985. He most recently renewed his Greek passport in March 2012, and it will not 
expire until March 2017. He renewed his Greek passport for his travel convenience, and 
because he wants to be treated as a Greek citizen while living in Greece. He wants to 
be able to stay in Greece as long as he pleases, and to be able to move freely in that 
country. He believes Americans are treated differently by the Greek government and he 
does not want to be treated adversely, or to have to answer questions about why he 
renounced his Greek citizenship. He stated that he was not willing to renounce his 
Greek citizenship, but indicated his willingness to surrender his Greek passport if 
necessary for him to receive a favorable trustworthiness determination. Applicant 
presented no evidence to show he surrendered his Greek passport. 
 
In his April 2013 Application, Applicant disclosed he failed to file his Federal and 
state income tax returns and to pay taxes for tax years 2008 through 2011, because he 
was living in Greece. A tax lien was filed against him in 2011, which was released in 
2012. Applicant also disclosed that he failed to pay his child support obligation while he 
was in Greece. He started to repay his past-due child support in 2011 after he started 
his current job. Additionally, Applicant disclosed that his home was foreclosed when he 
lost his job in 2009. In his 2013 Application, Applicant stated that he was in the process 
of interviewing debt-consolidation companies to select one. He submitted no 
documentary evidence to show he retained a debt-consolidation company. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addresses his financial problems and 
uncovered the 15 delinquent obligations alleged in the SOR. All of the SOR allegations 
are established by Applicant’s admissions and the included credit reports. Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
presented little or no documentary evidence of any payments made, contacts with 
creditors, or of any efforts to otherwise resolve his delinquent obligations.  
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems were the result of a contentious 
divorce, his child custody legal battle fees, and being laid off from his job in 2009. He 
was paying for his legal fees using his credit and when he was laid off he was not able 
to make the minimum payments on the credit cards. He explained that 25 percent of his 
current income goes to pay for his delinquent child support obligation. He intends to pay 
his delinquent child support obligation first, and then address his other delinquent debts. 
In his June 2013 statement to a government investigator, Applicant averred that he lives 
within his means and that he foresees no future financial problems. Applicant presented 
no documentary evidence of his current financial situation including his current monthly 
income, expenses, and debt payments. He did not present evidence to show he has 
participated in financial counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for a public trust position. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, 
by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing suitability for a 
public trust position. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive information. The 
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive and classified information enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
 
5 
 
 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[Access to sensitive information] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination 
of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the 
applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for 
issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the trustworthiness concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1985, and became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 1997. After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant continued to renew and 
currently possesses a valid Greek passport that will not expire until 2017. Applicant 
maintains his Greek citizenship for his convenience and to be entitled to the benefits 
and privileges reserved for Greek citizens.  
 
When Applicant was laid off from his U.S. job in March 2009 he travelled to 
Greece to be with his parents because his father was having health problems. He 
resided in Greece until February 2011. While in Greece, he lived in an apartment rented 
for him by his parents, and worked for a Greek company from July 2009 until June 
2011. Applicant served in the Greek army from March 2009 until September 2009, 
because as a Greek citizen he was legally required to comply with his mandatory 
military service obligation. Applicant never registered for the U.S. Selective Service 
System, and never served in the U.S. military.  
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a) and 10(b) are supported 
by the evidence. If these conditions are not mitigated they would disqualify Applicant 
from eligibility to hold a public trust position. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for 
foreign preference: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
7 
 
 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 None of the foreign preference mitigating conditions is applicable. Applicant 
exercised his Greek citizenship after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1997. He 
renewed his passport in 2012, served in the Greek army in 2009, and has received 
privileges and benefits reserved for Greek citizens during his visits to Greece. During a 
2013 interview, Applicant was made aware of the Government’s foreign preference 
concerns raised by his possession of a valid foreign passport. Applicant presented no 
evidence to show that he surrendered his Greek passport. Nor did he express his 
willingness to renounce his Greek citizenship.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  The concern under AG ¶ 6 is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
 
8 
 
 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2 Applicant has contacts and a close relationship 
of affection and obligation with his parents and siblings all of whom are residents and 
citizens of Greece. These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation because there is always the possibility that Greek agents, criminals, or 
terrorists operating in Greece may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the 
United States.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government. 
 
  Three foreign influence mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
There is no evidence to show Greece has a negative human rights record; that 
its government has ever conducted economic or industrial espionage against the United 
States; or that violent insurgencies or terrorists are allowed to operate freely within the 
Greek borders. Thus, it is less likely that Applicant’s family members could be 
vulnerable to coercion. Notwithstanding, Applicant has the burden of persuasion to 
demonstrate that his contacts in Greece do not pose a security risk, and he is not in a 
position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and his connections 
to family members. 
 
                                            
2  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
9 
 
 
Although Applicant provided some information concerning his parents and 
siblings, the information provided is insufficient for me to make a determination that it is 
unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests 
of a foreign individual and the interests of the United States. There is no information 
concerning his parents’ occupation before their retirement or whether they held a 
sensitive position within the Greek government.  
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Greece’s form of government. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship 
of Greece with the United States does not indicate a heightened risk of possible foreign 
exploitation.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his family members living in 
Greece. Applicant left Greece in 1985, at age 18. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 1997, for his then wife’s convenience. He has one daughter who is a U.S. citizen by 
birth. However, he moved to Greece from 2009 to 2011, and provided no financial 
support to his daughter.  
 
Applicant’s scant evidence is insufficient to show that he has established strong 
connections to the United States. It is not clear whether he has any financial and 
property interests in the United States, except for his employment. The record evidence 
fails to support a determination that Applicant’s ties and sense of obligation to the 
United States are sufficiently strong that he could be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States, even under circumstances detrimental to his 
parents and siblings in Greece.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
In 2007, Applicant went through a contentious divorce and child custody 
litigation. He used his credit to pay for his legal expenses. In 2009, he was laid off from 
his job and was unable to make minimum payments on his credit card debts. Applicant 
left the United States and went to Greece to live with his parents from March 2009 until 
February 2011. He worked for a Greek company from June 2009 to June 2011.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file Federal and state income tax returns, and failed to 
pay his taxes from 2008 to 2011. He also failed to pay his child support obligation for at 
least three years, and abandoned his outstanding debts and financial obligations. He 
started making payments on his past-due child support obligation and delinquent taxes 
after he was hired by his current employer in 2011. Two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
11 
 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because 
Applicant’s large debt is current and unresolved. Although Applicant’s financial 
problems are due partially to circumstances beyond his control, he failed to establish 
that he has taken responsible action to address his debts (contacted creditors and 
established payment plans). I find that his delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but 
does not mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide sufficient documentary evidence to show financial 
responsibility with respect to the debts alleged in the SOR. He knew or should have 
known of his legal obligation to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns and 
to pay his taxes. Additionally, he was aware of his responsibility to provide financial 
support for his daughter. He also was aware of his legal obligation to pay his debts.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence shows that he paid his back taxes and started paying his 
past-due child support obligation after he was hired for his current job. He failed to 
present any evidence of any other contacts with creditors. Applicant claimed that he 
intends to pay his debts and resolve his financial problems sometime in the future. On 
balance, I find that Applicant’s scant favorable evidence fails to show financial 
responsibility in the handling of his financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no evidence to show Applicant participated 
in financial counseling. Additionally, there is no evidence about Applicant’s current 
financial situation, including his income, living expenses, and whether he has incurred 
additional debts. There are no clear indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved or under control. The remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable to the 
facts of this case (AG ¶¶ 20(d), (e), and (f)). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and under the whole-person concept. 
AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant has worked for a government contractor since 2011, and this is his first 
trustworthiness application. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1997, but continues 
to exercise his Greek citizenship for personal convenience and possesses a valid Greek 
passport. His scant evidence is insufficient to show he does not have divided loyalties, 
and that he is not subject to possible foreign manipulation.  
 
Additionally, he has unresolved financial problems and failed to establish 
financial responsibility in the handling of his debts. Applicant’s financial problems, 
foreign preference, and foreign influence raise trustworthiness concerns.  
 
 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:       Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national security to grant eligibility for a position of trust to Applicant. Eligibility for a 
position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
