 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01293 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 24, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on April 18, 2014. His response, dated May 11, 2014, has been 
marked Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2014. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2010. He served in the U.S. military from 1988 until he 
was honorably discharged in 1997. He attended a technical school for engineering and 
advanced computer education. He married in 2000 and divorced in 2009. He married 
his second wife in 2009. He anticipates that they will divorce in September 2014. He 
has four children between the ages of 10 and 13. He also has two stepchildren who are 
young adults.1   
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts: SOR ¶ 1.a ($21,990), SOR ¶ 1.b 
($11,190), and SOR ¶ 1.c ($292). Applicant admitted owing the debts, and all of the 
debts appear on at least one credit report. However, the credit reports establish that 
Applicant is only an authorized user of the $21,990 delinquent credit card debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. He indicated that “some part of this debt [was] incurred by marriage.”2 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges an $11,190 charged-off account. Applicant’s credit reports 
indicate it is a car loan that was opened in March 2011 with a high balance of $43,485. 
The last action on the account was in May 2012, and the account was charged off in 
September 2012.3   
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $292 debt to a home security company that is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he stated that the company “never actively verified 
[Applicant’s] system was functioning after installation.”4 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from August 2005 to January 2006, December 2006 
to March 2007, and April 2009 to July 2009. He indicated that he “mistakenly allowed 
[his] wife to handle the finances in [their] marriage, thereby being somewhat unaware of 
the amount of debt in [his] name as well as hers.” He admitted that he is in a “tenuous 
financial situation,” but he is “researching and planning the best way out for [him] and 
[his] children.” He stated that he plans to pay his debts, but he will not be able to 
effectively enter negotiations with any creditors or work with a debt resolution company 
until after his divorce in September 2014. He is a novelist and his first book has been 
accepted by a publisher. He expects the book to be published early next year. He stated 
                                                          
1 Item 5; AE A.  
 
2 Items 4, 6, 7.  
 
3 Items 4, 6, 7.  
 
4 Items 4, 6, 7.  
 
 
3 
 
that he will use proceeds from the book to pay his debts. He and his wife have received 
some financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                          
5 Items 4, 5; AE A.  
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 The evidence does not establish that Applicant is personally liable for the 
$21,990 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. However, the 
debt is part of his family’s financial responsibilities, and it may be considered in how it 
affects Applicant’s overall financial situation. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant had several periods of unemployment between 2005 and 2009. He 
divorced his first wife in 2009 and he expects his second marriage to end in divorce in 
September 2014. He indicated that his wife handled the finances and he was unaware 
of the extent of his debt. Allowing his wife to handle the finances was a matter within his 
control, but his unemployment and divorce were beyond his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
  Applicant indicated that he may have a complaint with the home security 
company for the $292 debt that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he did not submit evidence 
of any dispute. He did not explain how his unemployment and divorce affected his 
current finances. He did not submit evidence of payments toward his delinquent debts. 
He stated that he cannot begin to address his debts until after his divorce in September 
2014. He also stated that he plans to use the proceeds from his book when it is 
published next year to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay 
off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other 
responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) 
(quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I do not find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
financial problems. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to 
determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) are not 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. I find that financial concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, the limited 
information in the record has not convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order 
to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
