 
1 
 
 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 13-00805 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
  
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns related to foreign influence. Accordingly, his request 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In his January 28, 2014 Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under Guideline B and requested a decision 
without a hearing. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) prepared a written presentation of the Government’s case in a file of relevant 
material (FORM) dated March 10, 2014. DOHA forwarded the FORM to Applicant, 
along with five government exhibits (GE 1-5) and government documents related to 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Applicant received the FORM on May 10, 2014. He was 
                                                          
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all security clearance adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
given an opportunity to respond with documentation to refute or mitigate the allegations. 
Applicant submitted two exhibits (AE A-B). Department Counsel had no objection. The 
case was assigned to me on June 26, 2014, for an administrative decision based on the 
record. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts related to Afghanistan and Pakistan, included 
in U.S. Government documents provided by Department Counsel. The facts are limited 
to matters of general knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s Response, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 64 years old, was born in Afghanistan. In 1975, he earned a bachelor’s 
degree in meteorology in Afghanistan. He served six months of mandatory military 
training in the Afghan army after graduating college in 1975. In 1978, Applicant married 
an Afghan citizen in Afghanistan. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has lived in 
the United States since approximately 1978, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2009. From 1997 to 2010, Applicant worked as a cab driver in the United States. In his 
Response to the FORM, he stated he has worked for seven years as a maintenance 
person for an international organization based in the United States, and has also 
operated “[a] few fast food restaurant (Fried chicken and Pizza) businesses.” From 2010 
to the present, he has worked for a defense contractor in Afghanistan as a cultural 
advisor and linguist. (GE 3-5; AE A)  
 
Applicant listed five children on his security clearance application. His 35-year-old 
son was born in Afghanistan in 1979. Applicant stated that his son is a legal permanent 
resident living in the United States, and he has not had contact with him since 1997. 
Applicant's second son was born in Afghanistan in 1980. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
residing in the United States. Applicant's remaining three children were born in the 
United States. They range in age from 19 to 30. They are U.S. citizens, residing in the 
United States. Applicant stated in his Response to the FORM that “I have well educated 
family, all 3 of my children are well educated and college students.” (GE 4, 5; AE A) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant‘s cousin is a citizen and resident of Pakistan 
(allegation 1.d) However, Applicant stated in his Answer this cousin died in December 
2013. Applicant stated during his security interview that none of his family members are 
affiliated with the Afghan government, and none know that he is undergoing an 
investigation for a security clearance. (GE 3, 5) Applicant stated in his interrogatory 
response: 
 
 
3 
 
 
I will never disclose my work related information to any of my family 
members because I don’t want to jeopardize their and U.S. national 
security. If I see any threat posing to my family and U.S. national security I 
will notify the U.S. government as soon as possible. (GE 5) 
 
Applicant listed four brothers and two sisters in his security clearance application. 
He provided conflicting information about the citizenship and his frequency of contact 
with some of the following four siblings, who reside in the United States.2  
 
• Applicant's brother (A) is an Afghan citizen with legal U.S. 
residency. During his security interview, Applicant stated he is in 
touch with A about four times per year by telephone, but in his 
security clearance application he said they are in touch once per 
year. (GE 4, 5) 
 
• In his security clearance application, Applicant said his brother (B) 
is a U.S. citizen, but during his security interview, he said B is an 
Afghan citizen. Applicant does not know B’s occupation, and has 
not had contact with him since 1995. (GE 4, 5) 
  
• In both his security clearance application and at his security 
interview, Applicant stated his brother, C, is an Afghan citizen and a 
U.S. legal permanent resident. He is employed as a linguist by the 
same company as Applicant. They have once yearly contact by 
telephone. (GE 4, 5) 
 
• Applicant’s sister (D) is a homemaker. He stated in his security 
clearance application that D is an Afghan citizen, and a legal 
permanent resident of the United States, but he noted in his 2013 
security interview that she had just received her U.S. citizenship. 
(GE 5) In his security clearance application, Applicant said their last 
in-person contact was in 2009, and they were in touch by telephone 
annually. In his security interview, he said they are in touch by 
telephone two or three times per month. (GE 4, 5) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant also has three living relatives who are foreign 
citizens and residents. Applicant's brother, E, is a citizen of Afghanistan and resides in 
Pakistan. He is 62 years old. In Applicant's 2013 security clearance application, he listed 
                                                          
2 Applicant's siblings who reside in the United States are not alleged in the SOR. The Appeal Board has 
held that facts not alleged in the SOR may only be considered for the following limited purposes: (a) to 
assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
(d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide 
evidence for whole person analysis under Directive § 6.3.) See, ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at 3 
(App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010). 
 
4 
 
 
his brother’s occupation as “self-employed shop owner,” but in his 2014 response to 
DOHA interrogatories, he described his brother as retired. In his security clearance 
application, Applicant stated he had ”[n]ot had contact with this brother since 2003,” (GE 
4) but in his 2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant said, “I’ve not visited or seen him in the 
past 7 years [i.e., 2007], since he moved from the United States to Pakistan.” (GE 3) 
However, during his security interview, Applicant said this brother had never been to the 
United States. (GE 5) In his Answer, Applicant stated he is in contact with his brother in 
Pakistan by telephone once or twice per year. (GE 3, 5) 
 
The SOR also cites Applicant’s sister (F) and sister-in-law (G), who are citizens of 
Afghanistan and reside in Pakistan. Applicant stated during his security interview that his 
sister F is a citizen of Afghanistan; however, in his security clearance application, he 
stated she is a citizen of Pakistan. (GE 4, 5) Applicant's sister-in-law3 (G) is a citizen of 
Afghanistan. Both his sister and sister-in-law are homemakers. He has not seen them in 
person in 33 years. Applicant is in touch with them by telephone once or twice per year. 
Applicant stated in his Response to the FORM that “[T]hey call me once or twice a year 
on EID occasions. However, I have never called them and I don’t have feeling for them.” 
He noted in his Answer that their “[r]esidence does not, in any way, affect my loyalty to 
the United States . . . ” (GE 3-5; AE A) 
 
DOHA interrogatories, provided to Applicant in November 2013, asked why 
Applicant had failed to disclose, in a 2010 investigation, that he provided money to 
relatives in Afghanistan and Pakistan since 1982. Applicant responded that he usually 
sent $100 to his brother or sister for expenses related to a religious holiday. In 2011, 
Applicant sent his brother E in Pakistan $500 to help pay for their mother’s funeral 
expenses. He stated during his security interview that he provides no other foreign 
financial support. The record contains no information on Applicant's U.S. property, 
financial interests, or assets. (GE 5) 
 
Applicant provided a May 2014 letter of appreciation from his linguistics manager. 
He noted that Applicant has provided excellent communication and translation services 
in support of U.S. operations in Afghanistan. He is respected by his command, his peers, 
and Afghan military leaders. He advises other linguists and military personnel, and has 
displayed a high degree of integrity and responsibility in his work. (AE B) 
 
The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan) 
 
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic of 28 million people with a democratically 
elected president. It has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban had risen to power and controlled 90 
                                                          
3 Applicant discussed two sisters, but not a sister-in-law, in his security clearance application and during 
his security interview. However, he admits in his Answer and in his FORM Response that he has a sister-
in-law who is a citizen of Afghanistan and resides in Pakistan. (GE 1; AE A) 
 
 
5 
 
 
percent of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies, engaging in human 
rights violations, and providing sanctuary to Osama bin Laden.  
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. Afghanistan’s first 
democratic election took place in October 2004, and the new government took power. 
 
A Department of State report notes that, as of May 2013, Afghanistan continued 
to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the Afghanistan Taliban, the 
Haqqani Network, and other al-Qaida-affiliated groups. A number of the attacks were 
launched from the groups’ safe havens in Pakistan. Afghan security forces now provide 
most of the security in Afghanistan, in anticipation of the withdrawal of U.S. and coalition 
forces. 
 
Terrorists, including al-Qaida and the Taliban, continue to assert power and 
intimidation within Afghanistan. The risk of terrorist activities is high. The Haqqani 
Network is a militant faction operating in Afghanistan that may be the most significant 
threat to Afghanistan security. On September 7, 2012, the United States declared the 
Haqqani Network a foreign terrorist organization. Terrorist organizations target United 
States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assaults, and hostage 
taking. The country’s human rights record is poor and violence is rampant. According to 
the U.S. Department of State (DOS), insurgents continue to plan attacks and 
kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. 
No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
The United States and other donors continue to fund development projects in 
Afghanistan, while increasingly delegating project implementation to the Afghan 
government. However, corruption is an ongoing issue. A November 2013 DOD report 
noted that criminal networks, insurgent groups, and corrupt government officials are 
often interlinked via multi-layered connections, making ties between the officials and 
criminal activity difficult to prove and prosecute. Afghan government stability after 2014 
is at risk from weak and corrupt governance and insurgent safe havens in Pakistan. 
 
The Islamist Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) 
 
Pakistan, a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia, gained independence 
from Britain in 1947. It has a population of more than 170 million. It held successful 
elections in February 2008 and has a coalition government. However, many parts of the 
country are affected by militancy and violent extremism. 
 
Terrorist networks operate within Pakistan. Members of the Taliban are known to 
be in the Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA) region, in Balochistan Province, 
which borders Iran and Afghanistan, and in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in the FATA 
region. The FATA region is a sanctuary to al-Qaida and other extremist groups. The 
Haqqani Network also operates in Pakistan. A 2013 Department of State report notes 
 
6 
 
 
that the Pakistani military undertook operations against groups that conducted attacks in 
Pakistan, but other groups, such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba continued to operate there. 
 
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) defines terrorist safe havens as 
“ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed physical areas where terrorists are able to 
organize, plan, raise funds, communicate, recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative 
security because of inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both.”4 The DOS 
concludes that, despite efforts by Pakistani security forces, groups including Afghan and 
Pakistani militants, foreign insurgents, and al-Qaida terrorists have safe haven in 
Pakistan, and train and operate there to plan attacks against the United States and its 
allies in Afghanistan. Taliban senior leaders also enjoy safe haven in Pakistan, which 
allows them to provide strategic guidance to insurgents with impunity. A November 
2013 DOD report noted that improvised explosive devices (IEDs)—which account for 
more Afghan, Pakistani, and coalition casualties than any other weapon--are made 
primarily from fertilizer and military or commercial-grade explosives produced in, or 
imported through, Pakistan. 
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported violations 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, honor crimes, wide-spread corruption, 
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in persons. The 
Human Rights Report on Pakistan issued by the U.S. DOS in April 2013 notes reports 
that Pakistani domestic intelligence services monitored political activists, politicians, 
suspected terrorists, and the media. The DOS warns U.S. citizens to defer non-
essential travel to Pakistan in light of the presence of terrorists who have attacked 
civilian and foreign targets. Credible reports indicate that authorities routinely used 
wiretaps, and intercepted and opened mail without requisite court approval.  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline B. 
 
                                                          
4 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2012, Chapter 5, Terrorist Safe Havens.  
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
7 
 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the 
national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 7 of Guideline B, I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
                                                          
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country do not automatically 
disqualify an applicant from obtaining a security clearance; such ties are only 
disqualifying if they create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential conflict 
of interest. The country in question also must be considered.9 The nature of a country’s 
government and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to coercion. The existence of terrorism in the 
country is also relevant to evaluating the potential for coercion, and an administrative 
judge must consider terrorist activities in the country at issue.10 Violent terrorists, 
including al-Qaida and the Taliban, operate against United States interests within 
Pakistan. It has a poor human rights records. Applicant maintains telephone contact 
with foreign family members in Pakistan, where authorities wiretap private 
communications. 
 
 The Appeal Board has held: 
 
The presence of terrorist activity in a foreign country is a significant factor 
in Guideline B cases, as is the nature of the foreign country. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); ISCR Case No. 08-
03798 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2010) (Activities of [country] government in 
monitoring private communications were relevant in evaluating the 
security significance of the applicant’s [country] relatives).11 
 
Applicant's family ties in Pakistan constitute a heightened risk of foreign coercion. AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (App. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006); ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 
14, 2004). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
9 
 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant has contacts with his brother, sister, and sister-in-law, who are citizens 
of Afghanistan and residents of Pakistan. Terrorist groups, including the Haqqani 
Network, Taliban, and al-Qaida, operate in Pakistan. The State Department has 
designated all three as foreign terrorist organizations. These groups engage in killings, 
extortion, and hostage-taking. Given these facts, Applicant could be placed in a position 
of having to choose between the interests of foreign family members and the interests 
of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has long-standing ties to the United States including his 35 years of 
residence; his five years as a U.S. citizen; his wife’s U.S. citizenship; his children who 
are either legal permanent residents or U.S. citizens; and his many years of U.S. 
employment. However, security concerns remain. Given Applicant’s ties to immediate 
family members who live in an unstable country where terrorist groups operate against 
U.S. interests, I cannot confidently conclude how Applicant would resolve a potential 
conflict of interest. Applicant receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
Applicant stated that he is in contact with his brother, sister, and sister-in-law in 
Pakistan by telephone once or twice per year, but has not seen his sister, and sister-in-
law in person in 33 years. However, he provided conflicting information about his 
contacts with his brother. In his security clearance application, he stated he had not 
seen him since 2003, but in his Answer to the SOR, he said he had not seen him in 
seven years, which would have been 2007. He stated during his security interview that 
his brother had never been in the United States, but in his Answer, he stated that his 
brother left the United States in 2007.  
 
In addition, Applicant has provided financial assistance to his family in Pakistan. 
He sent funds to his brother for his mother’s funeral in 2011. It also appears from the 
record evidence that he provided about $100 per year to his brother or sister in Pakistan 
between 1982 and at least 2010. His conduct shows that he has ties of obligation to his 
foreign siblings. His most recent statement that he no longer provides money to his 
relatives in Pakistan must be viewed in light of the fact that, according to the DOHA 
interrogatory, he did not disclose his financial support of his family in his 2010 
investigation.  
 
10 
 
 
As Applicant chose to have his decided based on the written record, without a 
personal appearance, these contradictions cannot be explored. But given the evidence 
at hand, I cannot conclude that his relationships with his relatives in Pakistan are so 
casual that they fail to raise a concern of foreign influence or coercion. AG ¶ 8(c) does 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”12 Applicant has 
positive factors weighing in his favor, including his 35 years of U.S. residence; his five 
years as a U.S. citizen; his five children who are U.S. citizens or legal permanent 
residents; his wife’s U.S. citizenship; and his support of the United States through his 
work with U.S. forces in Afghanistan. 
 
 However, Applicant’s ties to his family members who are citizens of Afghanistan 
and residents of Pakistan raise security concerns. He maintains telephone contact with 
his brother, sister, and sister-in-law, who live in a country subject to monitoring of 
communications by authorities, as well as ongoing threats from terrorist organizations. 
At least until 2010, he provided regular financial contributions to his family, and in 2011 
he sent $500 for his mother’s funeral expenses. His credibility is at issue based on 
conflicting information about the frequency of his contacts. Applicant has not met his 
                                                          
12 See Exec. Or. 10865 §7. 
 
11 
 
 
burden to show that his family living in Pakistan does not constitute a risk. I conclude he 
has not mitigated the security concern under Guideline B.  
 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
