The Government submitted six items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 14-00036
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah  A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated April 16, 2014.  Applicant received the FORM on April 23,1
2014. He did not submit additional information for the record. I received the case
assignment on June 2, 2014. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Applicant listed sporadic periods of  unemployment from September 2010 through March 2011; September      2
2009 through March 2010; and August 2008 through September 2008.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F,
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.o., with explanations.  (Item 3) 
Applicant is 39 years old. He is a pipe fitter with a defense contractor. He
completed his high school education in May 1994. Applicant is married, and he has one
child and one step child. (Item 5) Applicant has been employed with his current
employer since July 2013.  On August 27, 2013, he completed a security clearance2
application. (Item 5) 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $26,000. These
include collection accounts, medical accounts, and student loan accounts. (Item 1) A
credit report confirms the debts. (Item 6) His student loans (SOR 1.g and 1.h) are in
deferment. (Item 3)
Applicant explained in his Answer, that his financial issues began in
approximately 2008 due to “loss of a job.” The record reflects that he has had steady
employment since March 2011. He emphasized that he planned to seek credit
counseling to resolve the financial issues when he began his current 2013 employment.
In addition, he noted that he has retained a law group so that he could file a Chapter 7
bankruptcy petition, with an estimated filing date of May 2014. (Item 3) Applicant did not
submit any information concerning a bankruptcy filing.  He provided documentation that
three payments were made in February 2014 on one account (SOR 1.f). However, no
additional documentation was submitted to show the current status of the debt. 
Applicant’s record does not include a personal financial statement to show his
total monthly net income or total household expenses. There is no information in the
record that he has received financial counseling or assistance with financial planning
despite his intention to do so. (Item 5)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. “An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.”
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish his delinquent debts in the
amount of $26,000. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions
(FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c)
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is
left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has a
significant amount of delinquent debt. The delinquent obligations remain. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant did not provide
information to prove that the delinquencies were beyond his control and that he acted
responsibly. He had periods of unemployment, but he did not show a nexus between
the unemployment and his inability or unwillingness to pay on the delinquent accounts,
nor did he show what payments were made following March 2011, when he was again
employed. He  indicated that he has contacted a law firm to petition for Chapter 7
bankruptcy, but he did not submit any documentation that he has done so. He has not
contacted his creditors.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has failed to provide
documentation to show that he has a plan for the remaining delinquent debts.  He did
not present evidence that he received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem) does not apply. I find that  there are
not clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under
control. He has not met his burden of proof.
5
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 39 years old. He has worked for his current employer since 2013. Applicant
has not held a security clearance. While he made reference to his unemployment, he
failed to provide any specific information connecting his financial indebtedness to
circumstances beyond his control. Moreover, he did not demonstrate that he has taken
responsible steps toward the resolution of his debts. He has not provided sufficient
evidence or documentation to warrant mitigation in this case.  
Applicant’s steady employment, with the exception of short periods of
unemployment, creates significant doubts about the eventual resolution of the SOR
debts and his overall solvency and financial integrity. Since his Answer to the SOR in
March 2014, he has not put a plan in place to address his financial issues, or shown
that he has had recent contact with his creditors. He stated his intent to file under
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but provided no evidence that he started the process. His pattern
of financial irresponsibility and his failure to take action to resolve his debts do not show
good judgment or reliability. 
The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his security clearance does
not necessarily indicate anything adverse about an applicant’s character or loyalty. It
means that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to meet the strict
standards controlling access to classified information. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.o: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
