 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-00293 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for drug 
involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement) and Guideline E (personal conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which 
an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
2 
issued a Notice of Hearing on May 23, 2014, and I convened the hearing on June 17, 
2014. I admitted three Government exhibits (GE 1-3) and one Applicant exhibit (AE A). I 
admitted Department Counsel’s hearing exhibit list as HE I, and DOHA’s discovery letter 
to Applicant as HE II. DOHA received the transcript on June 25, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old, single, and has no children. He completed a bachelor’s 
degree in 2010 and a master’s degree in 2013. He has worked for a defense contractor 
since 2010. He was granted a secret security clearance in October of that year. In 2012, 
he applied for a top secret clearance. (GE 1-3; Tr. 19-20) 
 
Applicant first smoked marijuana as a high school sophomore in 2004,2 when he 
was 16 years old and visiting his brother at college. He testified that he smoked the 
second time in 2004 or 2005, when he was a junior or senior in high school. He also 
smoked while he was in college, 2006 through 2010. In his Answer, he estimated he 
used marijuana 7 to 12 times between 2004 and 2010. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 18-22, 39) 
 
After receiving a security clearance in October 2010, Applicant used marijuana 
three more times: in late 2010 with his brother at his brother’s house; in February or 
March 2011 with his roommate and a friend; and in January 2012 with his girlfriend 
while visiting her at college. He testified he was aware that marijuana use was illegal. 
When questioned about whether he thought about his security clearance before using 
marijuana on these occasions, Applicant said that he had not been assigned to any 
projects that involved exposure to classified material at the time he used marijuana. 
However, he testified he did not use that fact to justify his actions at the time. He said, “I 
really didn’t, I guess, gauge whether it was right or wrong. I just did it. I didn’t think 
anything of it.” (GE 3; Tr. 22-26) 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel questioned Applicant about his awareness 
of the requirement to avoid illegal drugs while holding a security clearance:  
 
DEPARTMENT COUNSEL:  After you were granted your clearance, you 
knew that it was contrary to the requirements of holding a clearance for 
you to use illegal drugs, correct? 
 
THE WITNESS:  Not necessarily. I know using illegal drugs is illegal, and 
that’s basically what I know. 
                                                 
2 In various documents, Applicant provided the dates of either 2003 or 2004 for his first use of marijuana. 
At the hearing, he clarified that he first used it in Spring of his sophomore year in high school, which was 
2004. I have used this date as the start date of his marijuana use. (Answer; GE 1, 2; Tr. 36)  
 
 
3 
DEPARTMENT COUNSEL:  Okay. But you answered questions about 
your drug use on your clearance application, correct? 
 
THE WITNESS:  Right. The questionnaire? 
 
DEPARTMENT COUNSEL:  Yes. 
 
THE WITNESS:  Yes. 
 
DEPARTMENT COUNSEL:  So you had some understanding that use of 
illegal drugs would be of concern with regard – 
 
THE WITNESS:  Right.  So I knew you had to disclose it and which I did 
on my next questionnaire. 
 
DEPARTMENT COUNSEL:  Right. And so you knew that it was contrary 
to the requirements of a person holding a clearance for you to use illegal 
drugs, correct? 
 
THE WITNESS:  I wouldn’t necessarily say that, no. I mean, I filled out the 
questionnaire. I answered the questions. I would have to look and see if it 
explicitly says -- I know that it’s a conflict of interest. I would say that. (Tr. 
24-25) 
 
In about 2007 or 2008,3 a friend suggested that Applicant use Adderall, an 
amphetamine stimulant, to help him concentrate and prepare for an examination. He did 
not know it was a drug that was abused. The drug had not been prescribed for Applicant 
by a physician. He has not used it since that time. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 15, 26-27) 
 
Applicant’s first security clearance application, in 2010, included the following 
question:  
 
Section 23: Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity 
 
a. In the last seven (7) years [emphasis in original], have you illegally 
used any drugs or controlled substance, for example, cocaine, crack 
cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.) narcotics (opium, morphine, 
codeine, heroin, etc.) stimulants (amphetamines, speed. . . ) (GE 2) 
 
Applicant answered “Yes” and listed one marijuana use in April 2004. He also noted,  
 
Experimented with the drug by smoking it out of a bowl with my brother’s 
college friends. The frequency of the activity was one time, and I used it 
                                                 
3 Applicant used both 2007 and 2008 as the possible dates for his one-time use of Adderall. (GE 1; Tr. 
15, 26) 
 
 
4 
once. I experimented with the drug at a young age. Marijuana is not and 
has never been a part of my lifestyle, but I have tried it. (GE 2) 
 
Applicant did not list any other uses between 2004 and 2010 “[d]ue to the fact that I did 
not know the exact instances of each event.” (Answer) He testified that, other than his 
first use in 2004, he did not remember the exact dates or frequencies of his use, and 
they were “few and far between.” Applicant decided to list the 2004 use he 
remembered, but not to give estimates for the dates of his other marijuana uses. He 
testified that he should have given approximate dates. He also did not list his use of 
Adderall because, at the time, “[I] was not aware that I was breaking any laws. . . “ and 
“[i]t was something that did not even cross my mind.” Applicant testified that he did not 
intend to conceal information or to provide false information on his 2010 application. He 
was granted a secret security clearance in October 2010. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 15-17, 26-
34, 40) 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted to allegation 2.b, which alleged that when he 
completed his 2010 security clearance application, he deliberately falsified his answer 
regarding the extent of his marijuana use. When questioned at the hearing, Applicant 
denied that he deliberately falsified the information. (Answer; Tr. 40) 
 
In September 2012, Applicant completed a second security clearance 
application. He noted in his Answer,  
 
I was more conscientious and diligent with explaining that I used 
marijuana, using a realistic estimate across a definitive time period to 
account for everything, without having to definitize the exact dates for 
each occurrence. (Answer) 
 
In response to the illegal drug use question in his 2012 application, Applicant answered 
that he smoked marijuana “[v]ery sparingly since high school” and listed 15 to 20 times 
as his total number of uses, with his last use in January 2012. He noted in the 
application that he smoked it with friends, usually at parties, but that he did not like 
smoking, and did not enjoy smoking marijuana. He said he purchased marijuana only 
one time, for his first use in 2004. Applicant also disclosed that he used marijuana while 
he held a security clearance, and that he misused Adderall. (GE 1; Tr. 21-22) 
 
In 2007, Applicant underwent a drug test for a previous employer, but has not 
been tested since starting his current employment in 2010. He testified that his current 
employer’s drug policy is to test an employee only if his or her productivity declines. 
Because Applicant has no problems maintaining productivity, “It was never a concern, 
that I would ever be drug tested . . .” (Tr. 25-26) 
 
Applicant testified that he has not used illegal drugs since 2012, and that he does 
not associate with anyone who uses illegal drugs. He has never received drug treatment 
or counseling. The record contains no information about whether or when Applicant 
 
 
5 
informed his facility security officer or supervisor about his illegal drug use, or his failure 
to fully disclose it on his security clearance application. (GE 1; Tr. 15) 
 
Applicant submitted a 2013 reference from his company’s manager of 
subcontracts administration. The manager states that Applicant quickly grasps the 
intricacies of complex processes, and is committed to excelling at tasks. He is a self-
starter, with prospects to become a company leader. She recommended that he 
participate in a leadership development program. The letter was written before the SOR 
was issued, and it is unclear if the writer is aware of Applicant's illegal drug use. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the Applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no 
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of 
persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as her or his own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. 
 
 I considered the following disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 25:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Between 2004 and 2012, Applicant used marijuana 15 to 20 times, despite the 
fact that he was aware that marijuana use was against the law. He purchased 
marijuana in 2004. After graduating from college in 2010, he accepted a position with a 
defense contractor, and was granted a security clearance. Subsequently, he 
possessed and used marijuana three times between 2010 and 2012, while he held a 
secret security clearance. He also possessed and used a prescription medication, 
without a prescription. AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g) apply.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are relevant under AG ¶ 26:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
 
7 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and  
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has 
since ended. 
 
 Applicant’s last marijuana use occurred in January 2012. Some mitigation 
applies based on Applicant’s abstention from marijuana use for the past 2.5 years. 
However, he used marijuana at social gatherings; these are not unusual 
circumstances, but common situations that are likely to recur. Moreover, Applicant's 
decision to knowingly violate the law by using an illegal drug, and to use an illegal drug 
while holding a security clearance, raises serious concerns about his trustworthiness 
and judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply to Applicant's marijuana use. 
 
 As to Adderall, Applicant’s use was not prescribed by a medical professional. 
However, AG ¶ 26(c) applies in part because his use of Adderall has ended. In 
addition, he was unaware that his use was illegal. He used it once, and has not used it 
in the past six years. AG ¶ 26(a) applies to his use of Adderall. I find for the Applicant 
on SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
 Applicant receives some credit for abstaining from marijuana use since 2012. 
He also testified he no longer associates with anyone with whom he used marijuana in 
the past. However, the mitigation available under AG ¶ 26(b)(1) is limited because he 
may continue to be in contact with some people with whom he used marijuana. The 
record does not indicate if Applicant maintains a relationship with the girlfriend with 
whom he shared his most recent use of marijuana in 2012. However, two of his 
marijuana uses occurred with his brother, a family member with whom he is likely to 
maintain contact. Applicant did not submit a statement of intent to avoid future use of 
illegal drugs. AG ¶ 26(b) applies in part. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Under AG ¶ 16, the following disqualifying conditions are relevant: 
 
 
 
8 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
Under Guideline E, the Government alleges that Applicant used an illegal drug, 
and used it while he held a security clearance. It also alleges that he knowingly falsified 
his security clearance application in 2010 when he (1) disclosed only one marijuana 
use in 2004, instead of 7 to 12 uses between 2004 and 2010; (2) failed to list his 
misuse of Adderall in 2008.  
 
Applicant testified that he listed only his 2004 use of marijuana on his first 
security clearance application because, other than that date, he could not remember 
the other dates he had used it. Applicant's explanation is not credible. He was an 
educated man at the time he completed his 2010 security clearance application. The 
application instructed him to “[p]rovide the date(s) of use or activity . . .” The software 
allowed him to enter explanatory comments. Applicant used this capability to add 
numerous comments to other answers in his application.  
 
In regard to his drug use, Applicant commented, “The frequency of the activity 
was one time, and I used it once.” This affirmation that he used it only once belies his 
claim that he omitted the other instances because he forgot the dates. The plain 
meaning of his statement is that he used marijuana only in 2004, rather than the 7 to 
12 times he had actually used marijuana between 2004 and 2010. Applicant's 
statement that he used marijuana once, six years in the past, was less damaging than 
the actual 7 to 12 uses that occurred at a time closer to when he completed the 
application. In fact, based on this misrepresentation, Applicant's clearance was 
granted. I conclude that he deliberately failed to disclose his multiple uses of an illegal 
drug between 2004 and 2010. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. However, I accept Applicant’s 
explanation that he did not list his Adderall use on his application because he did not 
realize it was illegal.  
 
Applicant admitted deliberate falsification in his Answer. However, at the 
hearing, he denied deliberately falsifying information. Based on my assessment of the 
evidence and Applicant's credibility, I do not accept his denial at the hearing. The 
Appeal Board has held,  
 
 
9 
Although it was legally permissible for Applicant to offer testimony and 
other evidence to explain away or recant his admission . . . [t]he Judge 
was not compelled to accept Applicant's explanation or recantation of his 
admission. It was legally permissible for the Judge to consider Applicant's 
explanation or recantation of that admission in light of the record evidence 
as a whole and her assessment of the credibility of Applicant's testimony.8 
 
After Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in 2010, he used 
marijuana three times between 2010 and 2012. Use of an illegal drug after being 
granted a security clearance demonstrates untrustworthiness, poor judgment, and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶ 16(c) applies. 
 
 Guideline E contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conduct. The 
following conditions under AG ¶ 17 are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
The record contains no evidence that Applicant attempted to inform his 
supervisor, facility security officer, or other official that he had used an illegal drug while 
holding a security clearance, or that he had not been candid on his 2010 security 
clearance application. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply.  
 
The mitigation discussed under Guideline H, AG ¶ 26(a), is essentially the same 
as that under Guideline E, AG ¶ 17(c). For the same reasons listed there, AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply. In addition, under AG ¶ 17(c), Applicant's conduct in using an illegal 
drug, and in particular, doing so while holding a security clearance, cannot be 
considered minor. The fact that, at the time he used marijuana while holding a security 
clearance, he was not assigned to projects involving classified information, is not 
relevant. Once an applicant receives a security clearance, he or she may be granted 
access to classified information at any time, and thus must uphold the obligations of 
security clearance holders at all times. Applicant's conduct constituted a breach of the 
obligations imposed on security clearance holders, and raises serious doubts about his 
reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
8 ISCR Case No. 03-01009 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2005). 
 
 
10 
Whole-Person Analysis  
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant's history includes positive factors that weigh in his favor, including 
abstinence from marijuana use for more than two years, his educational achievements, 
his professional accomplishments, and his laudatory recommendation from a current 
manager at his company. 
 
 However, the negative evidence weighing against granting Applicant a security 
clearance is more substantial. Applicant used an illegal drug; he used it while holding 
security clearance; and he falsified information he provided to the Government on his 
security clearance application. Applicant’s conduct is not mitigated, despite being 
granted a security clearance in 2010. That clearance was granted based on 
information that minimized the extent of his illegal drug use and placed it six years in 
the past. 
 
 Within one to two months of receiving his security clearance in 2010, Applicant 
used marijuana again. His conduct shows that he has repeatedly put his own wishes 
ahead of his duty to obey the law and to meet his obligations as a security clearance 
holder. Those who hold security clearances enter into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust. Applicant's illegal conduct while holding a security 
clearance does not demonstrate the trustworthiness and good judgment required in 
those granted access to classified information. 
 
 
 
11 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c    For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a – 2.b   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
