 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00646 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2014. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 5, 2014, with 
 
2 
 
 
a hearing date of May 29, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibit (GE) 1, which was admitted into evidence without objection. 
I marked Department Counsel’s discovery document as hearing exhibit (HE) I and his 
exhibit list as HE II. Administrative notice-related documents were marked as HE III. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A - C that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 9, 2014. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts 
concerning the country of Lebanon.1 Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents that verify, detail, and provide context for these facts in the Administrative 
Notice request. See the Lebanon section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, 
for the material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on these countries.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He was born in Lebanon in 1959 and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in October 1993. He holds a Ph.D. He is a dual citizen of 
Lebanon and the United States. He is married and his wife is a naturalized citizen of the 
United States and she is also a dual citizen of France. His two adult children reside in 
the United States and were born in this country. He believes he holds a clearance 
through the U.S. Department of Commerce, but no further evidence was offered to 
confirm or refute his belief. He has no history of military service in the U.S. military.4   
  
 Applicant left Lebanon when he was 16 or 17 years old because of the ongoing 
civil war. His family’s religious affiliation affected their status in Lebanon. He went to 
France for his undergraduate degree and met his future wife at that time. In 1983, he 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25; See HE III. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Tr. at 29, 43, 46, 63, 65; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
left France to pursue advanced degrees in the United States. He is the founder and 
senior scientist of a defense contracting company. His wife is an officer or director of the 
company. He is also a professor and has worked for DOD through those academic 
contacts for 25 years.5   
 
 Applicant’s brothers are dual citizens of France and Lebanon, with one brother 
residing in Lebanon and the other residing in France. Both brothers work in private 
industry. His son and daughter are citizens of the United States, France, and Lebanon 
with their Lebanese and French citizenship based upon their parents’ places of births. 
His children have only visited Lebanon when he has taken them to see his mother.6 
 
 His 83-year-old mother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. His mother is a 
homemaker. His father died in 1997. He visits his mother approximately once a year. 
His last visit was in November 2013. When he goes to Lebanon to visit his mother he 
stays with her and does not venture out or visit anyone else. When his mother passes 
away, he will have no reason to visit Lebanon. He has telephonic contact with his 
mother about once every week or two.7 
 
 Applicant owns real estate and has significant bank accounts in Lebanon. The 
property was acquired as an inheritance upon his father’s death. The property consists 
of a beach apartment and a flat where his mother lives. There is other property he 
acquired through inheritance along with his brothers and his mother that has not been 
partitioned. The value of his portion of these real estate holdings is approximately 
$500,000. Once his mother passes away he intends to sell all his Lebanese holdings. 
He has two bank accounts in Lebanon. The first was established to provide a source of 
funding for his mother after his father passed away. That account is valued at $375,000. 
Applicant, his mother, and one brother have access to this account. The second 
account is used by Applicant to fund his expenses when he travels to Lebanon. It is 
valued at about $93,000. He intends to close the accounts and bring the funds to the 
United States when his mother passes away. Applicant disclosed in great detail all of 
his foreign holdings on his security clearance application.8 
 
 The value of Applicant’s Lebanese assets, $968,000, can be compared to 
Applicant’s United States net worth, which he approximates at between $12 and $13 
million. He provided documented tax returns showing his annual income for 2013 and 
2012 of approximately $1.4 million and $1 million, respectively. He also documented the 
value of his home at over $6 million. He testified that the remaining portion of his net 
worth was investments and savings. He pointed out that he paid almost as much in 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 16-17, 41. 
 
6 Tr. at 29, 31, 36-37, 47-50. 
 
7 Tr. at 30, 46-47, 63. 
 
8 Tr. at 31-33, 54-56, 63; GE 1. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
federal and state taxes for 2013 ($594,744) as comprise his Lebanese assets. He 
stated that he owes all of his financial success to the opportunities the United States 
has afforded him throughout the time he has lived here.9  
 
Lebanon 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy in which people have the constitutional 
right to change their government. Due to civil war the exercise of political rights were 
precluded until 1992. Lebanon has a free-market economy and a strong laissez-faire 
commercial tradition. The economy is service-oriented. The United States enjoys a 
strong exporter position with Lebanon and is its fifth largest source of imported goods. 
More than 160 offices representing U.S. businesses operate in Lebanon. Since the 
lifting of passport restrictions in 1997, a number of large U.S. companies have opened 
branch or regional offices in Lebanon.  
 
The foreign policy of Lebanon reflects its geographic location, the composition of 
its population, and its reliance on commerce and trade. Its foreign policy is heavily 
influenced by neighboring Syria, which has also long influenced Lebanon’s internal 
policies as well. Lebanon, like most Arab states, does not recognize Israel, with which it 
has been technically at war since Israel’s establishment.  
 
Lebanon has had some human-rights problems including the arbitrary arrest and 
detainment of individuals and instances of arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life, 
torture, and other abuses. 
 
The terrorist group Hezbollah is a Lebanese-based radical Shi’a group and is 
designated by the United States as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” The Lebanese 
government recognizes Hezbollah as a “legitimate resistance group” and political party 
and until recently was represented by elected officials in the Lebanese parliament. 
Hezbollah also provides support to several Palestinian terrorist organizations and is 
known to be involved in numerous anti-United States and anti-Israeli terrorist attacks. 
Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon.  
 
 The United States seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon and 
to help preserve its independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. 
The United States provides more than $400 million in aid to Lebanon and pledged $1 
billion in additional aid. The aid reflects the importance the United States attaches to 
Lebanon’s development as a unified, independent and sovereign country. 
 
 U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that 
impose special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. Presently, there is a travel 
warning for U.S. citizens traveling to Lebanon due to the threat against westerners. 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 68; AE A-C. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
creates a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligations 
to protect sensitive information or technology, and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Lebanon. Applicant’s mother 
is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. His two brothers are dual citizens of France and 
Lebanon and one brother resides in Lebanon. His son and daughter are citizens of the 
United States, France, and Lebanon (through the birthplace of their parents). Applicant 
owes real estate and substantial bank accounts in Lebanon. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant was born in Lebanon, fled to France to achieve his undergraduate 
degree, came to the United States to earn his Ph.D., and ultimately achieved U.S. 
citizenship in 1993. He married a dual French and U.S. citizen. They have two children 
who are native-born United States citizens and have no affiliation with Lebanon except 
for their father’s Lebanese heritage. They are financially secure and have established 
well-grounded lives in this country. He traveled to Lebanon over the years to see his 
mother. There was no evidence to suggest that any of his Lebanese relatives are 
influenced by the politics of Lebanon. He has minimal contacts with his brothers. Merely 
knowing people from other countries does not create a heightened risk. I find that 
Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. 
Lebanon has some issues with human rights. His relatives do not have jobs or contacts 
with the Lebanese government. It is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position 
of having to choose between the interest of a relative and the United States. It is clear 
that even in the unlikely event such a situation would arise he would choose in favor of 
the interests of the United States Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply to SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.f. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s property interests in Lebanon are large, but insignificant when 
contrasted to his income and assets in the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(f) applies to 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.i. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has spent the last 31 
years in the United States where he became a citizen and has enjoyed a successful 
career that has left him financially secure. He has also raised a family in this country.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Lebanon. Lebanon is a 
parliamentary republic which traditionally has maintained close ties with the United 
States. However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. 
“The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests 
inimical to those of the United States.”10 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the United States, and its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood 
that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
9 
 
 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. Also important is whether the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. 
  
 Lebanon has human-rights issues and has been victimized by terrorism. The 
influence of Syria and the presence of Hezbollah in Lebanon is a concern. However, 
Applicant has proven his support for the United States through his contractor work over 
the past 25 years with DOD in the academic environment.  
 
Applicant’s life, career, substantial assets, and allegiance all lie in the United 
States. After considering all the evidence, including Applicant’s extensive and detailed 
disclosure concerning all his Lebanese contacts in his security clearance application, I 
am convinced that this country is best served by granting Applicant a security 
clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
