 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-00547 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on November 5, 2013. On March 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference, for Applicant. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 On April 2, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2014. On May 
14, 2014, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for June 10, 2014. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 – 4, which were admitted without objection. The Government requested that 
administrative notice be taken of one document with attachments. The document was 
marked as GOV 3. Applicant testified, and submitted one exhibit binder which was 
 
2 
 
 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-DD without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of hearing on June 19, 2014. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) concerning extended family in Colombia. She also 
admits use of a Colombian passport issued in 2013. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old senior engineer employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor.  She has worked for her current employer since 2009.  The 
highest degree awarded to her is a Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering. She 
has never married, but has a partner, who is a U.S. citizen, with whom she lives. 
Applicant has held a security clearance since February 2004. (Tr. 62) Subsequent 
investigations for security clearances have been adjudicated favorably. (AE DD) 
 
Applicant was born in Colombia. In 1983, at the age of two, she came to the 
United States with her parents. By virtue of her birth, she is a dual citizen of Colombia 
and the United States. In 1993, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen; however, 
in 1997 she received her certificate of citizenship. In 1997, Applicant travelled to 
Colombia with her mother and used her Colombian passport. At that time she did not 
have a U.S. passport. She received her first U.S. passport in 2002. (GOV 1) For any 
travel outside the United States, except September 2013, Applicant used her U.S. 
passport exclusively. (Tr. 22) Since receiving her U.S. passport, Applicant has 
travelled to Colombia three times. In 2004 and in 2007, she used her U.S. passport. 
However, she was told by the Colombian authorities that she would need a Colombian 
passport if she intended to return.  In June 2013, Applicant obtained a Colombian 
passport which she used to exit and enter Colombia to visit her ailing grandmother. 
(Tr. 37) The Colombian passport had an expiration date of June 2023. (Gov 2) She 
maintained her Colombian passport because she understood the Colombian 
government requires Colombian citizens to travel on their Colombian passport, not 
because she had a preference for Colombia. She had been stopped on previous 
occasions by authorities and told that failure to use a Colombian passport on the next 
trip could result in fines or detention. (Tr. 36) Applicant has been willing to renounce 
her Colombian citizenship since 2003. (Tr. 27) Applicant reported that she 
relinquished her Colombian passport to her security officer on September 5, 2013. (AE 
A) However, she retrieved it on September 20, 2013. After her trip to visit her 87-year-
old terminally ill grandmother, she surrendered the passport to the security office on 
October 7, 2013. Upon learning of the significant security concern related to 
possessing a foreign passport, Applicant has no intention of obtaining another 
Colombian passport. (Tr. 33) She read the foreign retention policy and believed that 
given a good cause there would not be a problem regarding her security clearance. 
Applicant stated that when she returned the 2013 Colombian passport to the security 
office, she was in compliance with security procedures. (AE B) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s parents are naturalized U.S. citizens. They live in the United 
States. Her mother works and plans to retire in the United States. Applicant has had 
no contact with her father since 2007. (Tr.51) Applicant’s closest extended family 
relationships are with her retired, naturalized aunt and uncle, and her three cousins 
who live in the United States. (Tr. 51) 
 
Applicant admits that she has extended family who are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. Applicant has two maternal aunts, cousins, and her grandmother. Applicant 
communicates with her aunts when they visit the United States every two to three 
years. She also calls them for Christmas and New Year. Applicant has reported her 
extended family on previous security clearance applications in 2009 and 2013. She 
consistently provided complete information about the foreign national relatives and the 
information has not changed over the years. 
 
Applicant reported that her extended family does not know the nature of her 
work. They do not know that she has a security clearance. Her relatives have not 
worked for the Colombian government or the military. They have never expressed any 
interest in her work. 
 
Applicant is active in her community. She plays in a local community orchestra. 
She is also a board member of the non-profit group. (AE U) She works with schools 
and businesses to raise musical awareness for children.  
 
Applicant uses her bilingual skills to help with the Meals on Wheels Program in 
the community. She mentors others as part of her work in a diversity forum for Latin 
Americans sponsored by her employer. (Tr. 61) 
 
Applicant considers the U.S. her home. The U.S. is where she wants to raise 
her family. It is where she wants to retire. (Tr. 94) Applicant has no business or 
property connections to Colombia. She has never voted in Colombian elections. She is 
active in the community, and votes in U.S. elections.  
 
Applicant submitted affidavits and letters of recommendations from her 
employer, coworkers, friends, and former college associates. All attest to her honesty, 
trustworthiness, and dedication to her work. (AE H-X) She has abided by all security 
policies and has never had a security infraction. Applicant’s performance evaluations 
rate her as “exceed” overall. Her case manager describes her as “intelligent, 
motivated, hard-working, insightful and a good person.”  He has known Applicant 
since 2011. (AE X) 
 
An engineer who works at the company where Applicant previously worked has 
known her since 2009.  He states that Applicant is a person of quality and character. 
She has had access to classified or sensitive information for years, and has never 
given one pause about her ability to safeguard information. (AE L) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Columbia is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with a population of 
approximately 44.8 million. Dual U.S. – Colombian citizens must present a Colombian 
passport to enter and exit Colombia. 
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to 
Columbia because violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some rural 
areas and cities.  While security in Colombia has improved significantly in recent 
years, terrorists and other criminal organizations continue to kidnap and hold persons 
of all nationalities and occupations for use as bargaining chips. The incidences of 
kidnapping in Colombia have diminished significantly from its peak at the beginning of 
this decade. 
 
The U.S. Secretary of State has designated three Columbian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC), the National Liberation Army 
(ELN), and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations. These groups carried out bombings and other attacks in and around 
major urban areas, including against civilian targets. 
 
The Columbian government’s respect for human rights continued to improve. 
However, illegal armed groups and terrorist groups committed the majority of human 
rights violations – including political killings and kidnappings, forced disappearances, 
torture, and other serious human rights abuses. 
 
The U.S. remained fully committed to supporting the Colombian government 
in its efforts to defeat Colombian-based Foreign Terrorist Organizations. The 
Colombian government continues vigorous law enforcement, intelligence, military and 
economic measures against the FARC, ELN, and AUC. The Colombian government 
has also increased its efforts with neighboring countries to thwart terrorist expansion, 
investigate terrorist activities inside and outside Colombia, seize assets, secure 
hostage release, and bring terrorists to justice. Colombia provided anti-terrorism 
training to nations in the region. The government continues to seek enhanced regional 
counterterrorism cooperation to target terrorist safe havens in vulnerable border areas. 
 
The U.S. – Colombia extradition relationship remains the most successful of 
such effort in the world. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG 
¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires  that  “[a]ny  doubt  concerning  personnel  being  considered  for  
access  to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . 
. .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship   with   the   Government   predicated   upon   trust   and   confidence.   
This relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty 
hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals 
to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise 
of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out 
in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
 
6 
 
 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC)10(a) (exercise 
of any right,  privilege  or  obligation  of  foreign  citizenship  after  becoming  a  U.S.  
citizen or through foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not 
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport); and FP DC ¶ 10(b) 
(action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American 
citizen) apply. Applicant used her Colombian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen 
when traveling to Colombia in 2013. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from Foreign Influence. The following Foreign Influence 
Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) apply: 
 
FP MC ¶ 11 (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country) (b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship) and FP MC ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated) apply. Applicant’s dual 
citizenship results from her birth in Colombia, and her parents’ citizenship. Applicant 
was unaware that possessing a foreign passport would be a significant issue related 
to her security clearance. She has since surrendered her Colombia passport to her 
security officer. It is now destroyed. She is willing to renounce her Colombian 
citizenship. 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference concerns. Guideline C is 
found for Applicant. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out 
in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following apply to 
Applicant’s case. 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion) applies because Applicant’s extended family, 
including her grandmother are citizens and residents of Colombia.  Applicant 
maintains some contact with them.  She visited her grandmother in 2013.  However, 
the mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.   
 
FI DC ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group or country by providing that information) applies for the same reason.  
Applicant’s relationship with her family members in Colombia create a potential conflict 
of interest between her obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and 
her desire to help her family members residing in Colombia.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from Foreign Influence. The following Foreign Influence 
Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) apply to Applicant’s case. 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the U.S.) applies. The nature of the foreign country 
must be considered in evaluating the likelihood of exploitation. Although terrorist 
groups operate in Colombia, and kidnappings occur, the Colombian government 
continues its vigorous law enforcement, intelligence, military, and economic measures 
against these groups. The United States and Colombia share a strong relationship and 
cooperate on numerous fronts including energy, trade, counter-narcotics and the 
environment. The documents submitted do not indicate that the Colombian 
government targets U.S. classified information. Applicant’s parents are living in the 
United States and are naturalized citizens. It is unlikely that Applicant would have to 
choose between the interests of the family and the interests of the United States. 
  
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest) applies.  While Applicant is close to her 
grandmother, her immediate family is in the United States and are naturalized U.S. 
 
8 
 
 
citizens. She has established a home in the United States. Applicant has lived in the 
United States since 1983. She attended college at a U.S. university. She works for a 
U.S. company. Aside from her extended family members in Colombia, her significant 
personal and professional ties are located in the United States. 
 
After   weighing   all   of   the   evidence,   including   the   witnesses’   testimony, 
Applicant’s testimony, and observing her demeanor at hearing, I am convinced that 
she would resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. 
 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the concerns raised 
under Foreign Influence. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, 
extent, and seriousness of   the   conduct;   (2)   the   circumstances   surrounding   
the   conduct,   to   include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency 
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to 
grant eligibility for a security clearance   must   be   an   overall   commonsense   
judgment   based   upon   careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances  surrounding  this  case.  Applicant  is  a  mature,  well- 
educated, and intelligent woman. She attended U.S. universities to obtain her 
undergraduate and Masters degrees. She has developed strong bonds in the 
U.S. While she has ties of affection to her grandmother, her immediate family, her 
parents, are citizens and reside in the U.S. She intends to live and retire in the U.S. 
Her superiors and co-workers attest to her favorable character and work performance. 
After evaluating all of the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has met her burden of mitigating the concerns raised under foreign 
influence and foreign preference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: 
 
Subparagraph 1.a: 
 FOR APPLICANT 
 
For Applicant 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.b: 
 
 For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  
 
FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   
 
For Applicant  
  Conclusion  
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it 
is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
NOREEN LYNCH 
 Administrative Judge 
     
