 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00169 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He is delinquent on more than 
$50,000 of student loans and has four other unpaid collection accounts. He has failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 27, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
On March 26, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), dated April 23, 2014. The FORM contained six attachments (Items). On April 
25, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions. In an undated response received prior to June 5, 2014, 
Applicant responded to the FORM and submitted three documents. Department 
Counsel did not object to the documents, which were marked and admitted into the 
record as Exhibits (Ex.) A – C. On June 16, 2014, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer (Answer) to the SOR, he admits the seven debts, states 
they occurred “a long time ago” and were the result of financial hardship. He asserted 
the debts were in a repayment program and he intended to be fully caught up on his 
debts by December 2014. (Answer) I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After 
a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old desktop specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2011 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 4) He is 
single and has one daughter born in January 2009. (Item 4) In February 2011 and 
March 2011, he was unemployed. From September 2005 through January 2011, he 
was employed for a federal contractor as a hardware support technician. 
 
 From June 1999 through August 2005, Applicant worked as an aftercare 
assistant director for a school. (Item 4) At night, he attended a university from 
September 1999 through June 2003, but did not receive a diploma. (Items 4, 6) In his 
August 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he stated 
he was delinquent on approximately $43,954 in student loans (SOR 1.b, $21,608 and 
SOR 1.c $29,087). (Item 4) He asserted he had to help his mother take care of his 
siblings after his mother lost her job. (Item 4) At that time, he was “working on getting 
into a program to repay” the student loan debt. (Item 4) In the same e-QIP, he stated a 
bank account (SOR 1.a, $1,265) had been turned over for collection. (Item 4) He stated 
he was working to settle this debt. (Item 4)  
 
 Applicant provided no additional information as to the financial hardship caused 
by his mother losing her job. He does not provide a date as to when this event occurred, 
nor does he provide documentation showing the impact this event had on his ability to 
pay his debts in a timely manner.  
 
 In September 2013 and October 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). (Item 6) In October 2013, 
he completed a Personal Subject Interview (PSI). (Item 6) He stated in October 2013, 
he would start making payment as part of a repayment program to address his 
 
3 
delinquent student loans. After paying $350 monthly for six months, the loans would be 
considered current.  
 
 In Applicant’s October 2013 PSI, he stated he was talking with two collection 
firms and wanted to settle and pay the debt listed in SOR 1.a ($1,200). (Item 6) He said 
he thought this was the same debt as the debt listed in SOR 1.g ($1,200), but provided 
no documentation supporting this assertion. He said he thought the debt in SOR 1.f 
($323) had been paid because the collection firm had stopped calling him or sending 
him letters. (Item 6) In his September 2013 PSI, he said he had no knowledge about the 
two telephone service debts listed in SOR 1.d ($493) and SOR 1.e ($478). (Item 6) 
 
 In his response to the FORM (Response), Applicant stated he was working with a 
credit repair firm to address his debts. He submitted a one-page welcome letter from the 
company stating the firm would help Applicant receive his credit reports and would start 
working on his case. (Response) There is no documentation showing any agreement 
with the company, payment to the company, which delinquent accounts were to be 
addressed by the company, or what the company had done or would do to assist 
Applicant. He also submitted an email for a free-online course called “Managing my 
money.” (Response) The course was to start on May 12, 2014. Applicant failed to 
provide documentation that he took the course or what he learned from that course.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 Applicant has more than $50,000 of delinquent student loans. He also has four 
collection accounts that remain unpaid. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced no evidence of 
circumstances beyond his control other than his two months of unemployment in 2011 
and his assertion that he had to help take care of his siblings when his mother lost her 
job. He has provided no documentation showing payment on any of his debts. Even the 
three smaller debts of less than $500 each remain unpaid. He has not acted responsibly 
in addressing his debts. He provided no evidence he has received credit or financial 
counseling. He provided an email showing he was going to take a free online money 
management course. However, he never said he completed the course or what he 
learned about financial management from the course. He has not demonstrated that his 
financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under control. 
He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
 Applicant asserts he is currently in a program to resolve his delinquent debts. He 
provided limited documentation about this program. In September 2013, he said he had 
arranged a repayment agreement to bring his delinquent student loans out of default. 
 
6 
Payment was to begin following his October PSI. He provided no document to show any 
payment on his student loans. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. Applicant 
has been asked about these obligations starting in September 2013. Given sufficient 
opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act timely or 
responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant was unemployed for two months in 2011 
and, at some date not listed in the record, he helped support his siblings. These are 
events beyond his control; however, he failed to establish how two months of 
unemployment three years ago and helping support his siblings at some date have 
impacted his current ability to pay his debts. He has failed to show any payment on the 
seven delinquent debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Signing up for an 
online personal financial management course is insufficient to establish Applicant has 
received financial counseling. Additionally, there is no clear showing that his financial 
obligations are being addressed.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant 
has failed to document payment on any of the delinquent accounts. The mitigating 
condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account. He asserted that 
the debts listed in SOR 1.a and SOR 1.g maybe the same debt, but provided no 
documentation supporting this assertion.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The majority of the debt set forth in 
the SOR was not incurred on luxuries, but for student loans. This is not the type of debt 
that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. However, Applicant has failed to 
document any payment on those loans. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his October 2013 PSI, which was reinforced in 
the February 2014 SOR. Even the $323 collection debt (SOR 1.f) has yet to be paid. 
Since receiving the February 2014 SOR, the only documented action related to his 
delinquent accounts is that he contacted a credit repair firm and was planning on 
viewing an online personal financial management course. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts which would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such 
information, and by relying solely on his paragraph of explanation in response to the 
SOR, his paragraph of explanation in response to the FORM, and two emails, he failed 
to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Applicant expressed the hope that all of his financial difficulties 
would be resolved by December 2014. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a 
clearance is not recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent 
obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially 
addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations, criminal conduct, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
