 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00116 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
        Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated March 17, 2014, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an April 9, 2014, response to the SOR, Applicant denied five of the eight 
allegations raised, and noted she was awaiting validation concerning the remaining 
allegations asserted. She also requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 
2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 8, 2014, setting the hearing for May 29, 
2014.  
 
2 
 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered five 
documents, which were accepted as Exhibits (GX) 1-5 without objection. The 
Government noted that Applicant’s previously submitted materials mitigated the 
concerns related to SOR allegations 1.a, 1.e, and 1.f; consequently, those allegations 
were found in Applicant’s favor. Applicant offered testimony and 14 documents, which 
were accepted without objection as Exhibits (AX) A-N. She was given until June 9, 
2014, to submit any additional materials. On June 3, 2013, Applicant forwarded six 
additional documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as AXs. O-
T. On June 9, 2014, the transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received and the record 
was closed. Based on my review of the testimony and materials, I find that Applicant 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old office administrator who has worked at her present 
place of employment since 2009, where she transitioned from a temporary to a 
permanent employee in late 2012. She has a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration. Applicant has been legally separated from her husband for many years. 
As a working mother without spousal support, she raised a daughter who recently 
graduated from college with distinction. The SOR cites eight delinquent accounts 
amounting to approximately $13,000 in delinquent debt. 
 
 In the summer of 2007, Applicant’s daughter began experiencing serious 
headaches and other symptoms initially indicating a sinus infection. A pharmacist 
advised she try an over-the-counter medication, which she did without success. Being 
new to the area, they had no established general practitioner upon whom they could 
rely. A few days later, the 13-year-old child was taken to the emergency room because 
she could not breathe. The hospital determined she had a sinus infection and 
discharged the girl. Her health continued to decline and Applicant took her daughter to 
the hospital, where the child was diagnosed as having tonsillitis. As the school year 
approached, the matter remained unresolved and the symptoms worsened. By the time 
the child had lost 50 pounds and was back in the hospital, Applicant was desperate. 
She insisted that her daughter be given a CT scan. The physicians reluctantly complied 
with her demand.  
 
The CT scan showed that Applicant’s daughter had lesions on her brain. The 
child was immediately airlifted to a major children’s hospital. By the time she arrived at 
the hospital, the child was in a coma. Surgery was deemed to be an immediate 
necessity, but complications were present due to vein blockages and the need for a 
blood thinner. Brain surgery was ultimately performed, followed shortly thereafter by a 
procedure on the child’s neck. For the next two years, Applicant would personally care 
for and home school her daughter during her treatment and recovery. Consequently, 
Applicant switched to temporary work for a period, then was unemployed for a year 
while she provided needed care for her child.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 During the early months of her daughter’s ordeal, Applicant made payments on 
two credit account balances (SOR allegations 1.c and 1.g). that had been acquired 
when Applicant tried to help a friend in dire financial need. They amounted to about 
$10,000 and represent the vast majority of the debt at issue. The friend failed to repay 
Applicant for the loans as contemplated. This created an unexpected financial burden 
that coincided with Applicant’s need to miss work, care for her daughter, and attend to 
the child’s medical and emotional needs. Applicant contacted all of her creditors and 
informed them of her situation. Most were not interested in working with her during her 
time of financial distress.  
 
 Applicant became short on income due to her daughter’s illness and her own 
periods of underemployment and one year of unemployment necessitated by her need 
to care for the child. (Tr. 42-43) She addressed her debts as best she could and 
expressed willingness to make monthly payments on any outstanding debts to her 
creditors. She was making regular payments on the debt noted at SOR allegation 1.g, 
the second largest debt cited. Upon satisfaction of that debt of about $2,700, however, 
the bank chose to impose a garnishment through her employer, citing additional sums 
owed due to interest. Applicant provided it with a receipt accounting that she had paid 
off her debt in full, and the bank accepted her evidence. (Tr. 24-25) This debt has been 
satisfied since at least November 2013.  
 
 Next, Applicant addressed the largest debt at issue in the SOR, noted at 
allegation 1.c for $7,203. The underlying debt balance before interest and fees was for 
about $1,000. Applicant satisfied her remaining balance on that debt through $50 
monthly payments. Once she began making those payments, however, the bank took 
her to court, claiming she owed it $7,000. (Tr. 26) Applicant provided evidence of her 
payments and showing that the proper balance was $1,000. (Tr. 26) Her attorney 
provided the court with her evidence, and the bank’s collection entity failed to provide 
any evidence substantiating its claim for a higher amount. The suit resulted in a non-
suit, thus squelching the collection entity’s effort to obtain more money than was owed.  
(Tr. 28-29; AX.O)  
 
 As noted before the hearing, Applicant earlier provided evidence showing that 
the SOR allegations at 1.a, 1.e, and 1.f were mitigated in Applicant’s favor; the debts 
noted at 1.c and 1.g are discussed above. The final debts at issue in the SOR are 1.b, 
1.d, and 1.h, which are medical collection accounts for $177, $800, and $270. (See Tr. 
53-54) Applicant and her daughter have had health insurance throughout the period at 
issue. Applicant does not recognize these medical collection efforts, nor has she been 
able to determine their origin. She has formally disputed their entry on her credit report 
with Equifax in the hopes of identifying the accounts (AXs. R-T). Should they be shown 
to be hers and legally owed, it is her intent to satisfy them immediately. (Tr. 55-56) 
 
Applicant’s current finances are sound and she has the ability to address these 
debts if needed. She is current on all of her expenses and obligations. Applicant 
maintains a savings account and a 401(k) retirement account. Her daughter is soon to 
leave home for graduate school on an impressive scholarship. Applicant is a valued 
 
4 
 
 
employee at work. A superior wrote that Applicant is an exceptional communicator who 
has a good work ethic, is discrete, and self-motivated. (AX Q; see also AXs D-I)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 
acquired several delinquent debts amounting to approximately $13,000. This is 
sufficient to raise two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s generosity was abused when the friend to whom she loaned about 
$10,000 failed to repay her for a loan Applicant made with funds drawn on her credit 
cards. While neither Applicant’s daughter’s illness or the unreliable friend were the 
 
6 
 
 
direct cause of these debts becoming delinquent, Applicant’s periods of 
underemployment and unemployment necessitated by her daughter’s care are. The 
remaining debts have already been addressed or are in dispute because Applicant, who 
has had health insurance coverage, cannot identify the alleged medical accounts. 
Regardless, before the hearing, Applicant provided sufficient evidence to satisfy the 
Government with regard to SOR allegations 1.a, 1.e, and 1.f. At the hearing, she 
credibly questioned and disputed the debts cited at SOR 1.b, 1.d, and 1.h. Evidence of 
her correspondence with Equifax concerning this approximately $1,250 of alleged debt, 
was timely received after the hearing. That leaves the approximately $10,000 at issue in 
SOR allegations 1.c and 1.g, which Applicant demonstrated had previously been 
satisfied. Consequently, significant progress has been timely made.  
 
While Applicant did not receive specific financial counseling, she does have a 
bachelor’s degree in business. This apparently helped her live within her means despite 
a protracted period of financial distress and unemployment. It also gave her the savvy to 
try to work with her creditors when her daughter’s illness began to adversely impact her 
career. This is to her credit. Moreover, should Applicant be ultimately determined to owe 
any or all of the $1,250 in disputed accounts, she has both the savings and motivation 
to resolve them as soon as possible. I find that mitigating conditions ¶ 20(a), (b), (c), (d), 
and (e) apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature and well-educated woman with a background in business 
and management. As a single mother, she raised a highly successful young woman 
who is about to begin graduate school. She did so with no help from her estranged 
husband, who similarly failed to assist her when her daughter was in poor health. When 
that time came, Applicant found the personal fortitude and financial savvy to endure a 
period of underemployment and a year of unemployment while she cared for and 
educated her healing daughter. Given the circumstances, she came through the 
protracted crisis in good shape. A bad loan she extended has been paid off by Applicant 
and some minor debts have been satisfied. Only is about $1,250 remains in earnestly 
disputed debts, which she will honor if they are shown to be hers.  
 
7 
 
 
Today, Applicant continues to live within her means. She maintains a savings 
and checking account, as well as a retirement account. Her business school 
background continues to help her at work and in her personal life. She is a valued 
employee. Her daughter is soon to leave home for graduate school on a scholarship. 
There is no reason to suspect Applicant will ever again have any financial issues 
warranting security concerns.  I find that Applicant mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
