 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    .  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00254 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Andre A. Hakes, Esq. 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for alcohol 
consumption and criminal activity. His request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that cited security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). This action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his undated Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three SOR allegations, 
with explanations, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 20, 
2014. At the hearing on June 4, 2014, I admitted five Government exhibits (GE 1-5), 
and 16 Applicant exhibits (AE A-M). DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 13, 
2014. 
 
 
 
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. I make the following 
additional factual findings. 
 
 Applicant, 56 years old, married in 1981 and divorced in 2006. He is remarried. 
He has four adult children from his first marriage, and three grown stepchildren. He 
holds a bachelor’s degree, completed in 1981. He served as an officer in the Navy, 
starting in 1981, and received his first security clearance that year. Numerous positions 
he held in the Navy involved tracking, inventorying, and safeguarding classified 
information; he had no security violations during his naval career. He successfully 
completed the ship handling and command qualification examination in 1992. He was 
honorably discharged in 1998. He is a systems engineer, and has worked for the same 
defense contractor since 1998. (GE 1; AE M, N; Tr. 26-30, 56, 65-68) 
 
In December 2006, Applicant had been assigned to a work project for which he 
worked 80-hour weeks. The night the project ended, he and his coworkers celebrated 
with drinks. He felt drowsy while driving home, pulled over, and fell asleep. He was 
awakened by police, who charged him with misdemeanor Drunk in Public. On January 
8, 2007, he pled guilty and paid a fine.1 (GE 1, 2; Tr. 32-33) 
 
In 2011 and 2012, Applicant worked on a series of high-pressure projects for his 
company. He described himself as someone who could not “say no” to the extra 
workload. For one contract, he worked 80-hour weeks for one month. The next project 
was behind schedule and demanded equally long hours. He then worked for 13 
months in another location, traveling back and forth when possible to be with his family. 
His longest workweek during the project was 112 hours, about three months before his 
2012 arrest. In the two weeks before his 2012 arrest, he was living in a tent so that he 
could commute to work more quickly. He worked 18-hour days, five days per week. He 
sometimes slept in his car. He spent one day per week with his family. (Tr. 38-40, 71-
72) 
 
On May 12, 2012, Applicant drove home after drinking alcohol. He was stopped 
for speeding. The two officers administered roadside sobriety tests before placing 
Applicant in handcuffs. Instead of willingly entering the police vehicle, Applicant fought 
with, kicked, and cursed the police officers before being taken to jail. He was charged 
with felony assault on a law enforcement officer, misdemeanor driving while 
                                                 
1 Applicant testified that he engaged in binge drinking on weekends between 2000 and 2012. However, 
the SOR does not allege his drinking history or alcohol-related events during that period. (SOR; Tr. 69-
70) Unalleged conduct may only be considered for the following limited purposes defined by the Appeal 
Board: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or 
(e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive § 6.3.) ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 08-
09232 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010). 
 
 
3 
intoxicated/first offense, and refusing a breath test. He does not remember most of the 
event, but during his court hearing, he saw a video of the arrest. He described it as 
“[s]urreal. It was disgusting, really, appalling.” (GE 1, 3, 5; Tr. 33-38, 62-64) 
 
The last time Applicant drank alcohol was June 20, 2012, the day he saw the 
video. The next day he began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). He has been 
attending regularly since, and has accumulated numerous sobriety chips. He usually 
attends three meetings per week, and his most recent meeting was two days before 
the hearing. His AA sponsor provided a letter noting that, after the first eight months, 
Applicant had read the literature, was working the steps enthusiastically, and checked 
in with the sponsor several times per week. He believes that Applicant's conduct during 
the arrest was out of character for him. In May 2014, he wrote that Applicant had 
maintained his sobriety, attends regularly, “[a]nd has help [sic] many other people with 
his experience, strength, and hope.” (GE 4; AE G, H; Tr. 40-42, 47, 51-52, 64-65) 
 
Applicant began weekly professional counseling in May 2012, on his attorney’s 
suggestion. He testified he was “[d]esperate to do anything to straighten myself out.” 
He provided letters from his therapist, a licensed professional counselor (LPC).2 The 
therapist commented that Applicant’s motivation began when he witnessed the video, 
an experience that “[c]learly shocked him to the core.” He noted that Applicant had 
“extreme remorse” for his behavior the day of his arrest, “[f]eels these behaviors went 
entirely against his sense of moral integrity. . . ” and has a “[t]remendous desire to 
develop the insight and behavioral change such that he never repeat these behaviors 
again.” (GE 1; AE F; Tr. 43, 49-51) 
 
In November 2012, the therapist wrote that Applicant “[h]as engaged in his own 
personal development with great determination and vigorous effort . . . to an extent 
uncommonly witnessed in this office.” He explained that Applicant was attending AA, 
considering sponsoring others, attending church regularly, and recognizing the 
improvements in his health, motivation, and improved family relations. Applicant 
followed all therapeutic suggestions and implemented many ideas of his own to further 
his goals. The therapist indicated that the counseling ended successfully in June 2013. 
The counselor concluded, “In my professional opinion, the prognosis for [Applicant] 
remains excellent, especially with regards his sobriety . . .” Applicant testified that he 
attended therapy longer than required by his sentence because it helped him learn how 
“[t]o best live, you know, without alcohol. How to take advantage of – of the things I 
discovered through the program.” (GE 1; AE F; Tr. 43, 49-51) 
 
On January 25, 2013, Applicant entered into a plea agreement related to the 
2012 arrest. The charge for refusing a breath test3 was not prosecuted (nolle prosequi). 
                                                 
2 The counselor’s letterhead indicates he is a licensed professional counselor (LPC). The documentation 
and testimony do not include additional information about his credentials or practice. (AE F) 
 
3 The court described the breath-test refusal as civil, rather than criminal, noting the “civil warrant is 
concluded by an order of nolle prosequi, and the civil refusal warrant will not be renewed.” (AE A) 
 
 
4 
Applicant pled guilty to the DWI. He was fined and sentenced to 90 days in jail (50 
days suspended); good behavior for two years; his driving license was revoked for 12 
months, and an ignition interlock was installed in his car for 6 months. Applicant also 
agreed to plead guilty to the charge of felony assault on a law enforcement officer, but 
conviction was withheld, and the plea was taken under advisement, subject to the 
following requirements: one year of supervised probation; during probation, attend 
substance abuse counseling, and mental health counseling, if recommended; abstain 
from alcohol; submit to random substance abuse tests; and exhibit good behavior 
during a two-year advisement period that expires January 25, 2015. Applicant was 
required to attend ten counseling sessions. Following successful completion of all 
requirements, the assault charge would be reduced to a lesser charge of misdemeanor 
assault and battery, a 12-month sentence would be suspended, with good behavior 
required for two additional years. The court also imposed a fine of $350, reduced to 
$250 upon successfully completing the state alcohol safety action program (ASAP). 
(GE 4; AE A, B; Tr. 44, 49) 
 
Applicant’s probation officer provided a letter showing that he complied with the 
court’s orders, his random substance abuse tests during the one-year period were 
negative, and he successfully met the conditions of his probation, as of January 2014. 
He testified that he also completed 19 days of jail time, as required. His ASAP case 
manager informed the court in January 2014 that Applicant had met the requirements 
of the state ASAP program. The ASAP executive director provided a report on 
Applicant's successful completion of the ignition interlock requirement. It showed that, 
while driving the car to and from work each day for six months, he had no violations. 
(AE C, D, E; Tr. 44-49) 
 
 Applicant testified that he has made lifestyle changes over the past two years to 
have a more balanced life. He changed his work schedule to reduce his hours at the 
off-site location to three days per week. He does not work more than 40 hours per 
week, unless specifically required. He spends more time with family, and doing 
physical activities around the home. At social events where alcohol is served, he 
explains to friends and coworkers that, “I don’t drink anymore, I can’t handle it, but I 
can be with you guys.” They have been accepting and supportive of his sobriety. 
Applicant also volunteers to be the designated driver. (Tr. 51-54, 59-61, 72-73) 
 
Applicant submitted his Navy fitness reports for 1982 through 1997. He received 
several recommendations of early promotion, and scores of either 4 (above standards) 
or 5 (greatly exceeds standards) in most categories. His facility security officer (FSO) 
described him as a “[d]edicated, hard-working employee with no history of security 
incidents or infractions during his 14½ years of service.” He was selected Engineer of 
the Quarter in 2002, and Support Engineer of the Year in 2009. Applicant's therapist 
recommended him for a security clearance based on his opinion that Applicant is 
trustworthy and reliable.  (GE 4; AE A, F, O, P; Tr. 58) 
 
 
 
5 
Several coworkers and friends provided character references. A senior program 
manager and former Navy commanding officer, who has known Applicant 16 years, 
noted that he performed his work in a way that “far exceeded any expectation and 
[was] a credit to the company.” He also stated that he and other acquaintances had 
noted that Applicant does not drink alcohol at social events. Another coworker who has 
known Applicant for 16 years, considers him to be in the top ten percent of the 
company’s employees. He noted that Applicant's dedication has resulted in his team 
receiving bonuses for putting in extra time and work and completing projects ahead of 
schedule. He has socialized with Applicant since June 2012 and has not seen 
Applicant consume alcohol. (AE I, J)  
 
Another project manager who provided a reference opined that Applicant's 
commitment to Navy personnel is “beyond reproach.” He has been with Applicant at 
social occasions and noted that Applicant did not drink alcohol. He believes that 
Applicant “[h]as truly embraced his sobriety. . . “ and possesses the “[h]igh character 
and responsibility” required to hold a security clearance. (AE K; Tr. 52-53) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and policy in the AG.4 Decisions must also 
reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines G and J. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government must produce 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the 
applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a 
“right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship with the 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
6 
Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as her or his own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the following security concern about alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 includes the following potentially applicable disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;  
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program;  
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and  
                                                 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
7 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 Applicant was arrested on a charge of Drunk in Public in 2006, and DWI in 
2012. While intoxicated, he fought with police during his 2012 arrest, resulting in a 
charge of felony assault on a law enforcement officer. He has not been diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent or an alcohol abuser. AG ¶ 22(a) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 lists the following mitigating factors: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment 
and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant’s two alcohol-related arrests in the past eight years are infrequent. His 
significantly changed circumstances since his arrest in 2012—his two years attending 
AA, his year of mental health counseling, and most significantly, his two years of 
sobriety—reflect well on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 
23(a) applies. 
 
Applicant was repelled by the video showing his assault on a police officer while 
intoxicated in 2012. It was a life-changing event that made him realize the need for 
significant, immediate changes in his life. He has not had alcohol since that day. The 
next day, he began attending AA regularly, as confirmed by his probation officer and 
his sponsor. He also began therapy with a licensed professional counselor who 
documented Applicant's significant remorse, desire for change, and commitment to 
 
 
8 
sobriety. He began AA and therapy on his own initiative. He has demonstrated 
commitment by his pattern of abstinence over the past two years. He successfully 
completed counseling in June 2013. In line with the Appeal Board’s holding that 
substance abuse professionals should not be defined narrowly,8 I find that Applicant's 
licensed professional counselor qualifies under AG ¶ 23(d). He determined that, after 
completing one year of counseling, Applicant has an “excellent” prognosis. AG ¶¶ 23(b) 
and (d) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct,  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
 (a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
 (d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program; and, 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
 Applicant was arrested and pled guilty to a charge of Drunk in Public in 2006. In 
2012, he was arrested and, subject to a plea agreement, he pled guilty to DWI and 
felony assault on a law enforcement officer. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) apply. Applicant has 
                                                 
8 The Appeal Board has held that Administrative Judges should not construe definitions of qualified 
substance abuse professionals narrowly. In ISCR 07-00558.a1, it noted that AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (e) 
“[c]ontemplate a broad range of providers who, by education and by position, are qualified to diagnose 
and treat alcohol dependence and other substance abuse disorders. By its own terms, AG ¶ 22(d) lists 
the . . .  types of care providers by way of example only. . . . In analyzing cases before them, Judges 
must be guided by common sense and with a view toward making a reasoned determination consistent 
with the interests of national security.” ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). 
 
 
9 
successfully completed his probation, and therefore, AG ¶ 31(d) does not strictly apply. 
However, he does remain under an advisement period, and his felony charge will not 
be reduced to a misdemeanor until he completes the advisement period in January 
2015. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides the following conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
under Guideline J: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense;  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement; and, 
 
(e) potentially disqualifying conditions (b) and (f) above, may not be 
mitigated unless, where meritorious circumstances exist, the Secretaries 
of the Military Departments or designee; or the Directors of Washington 
Headquarters Services (WHS), Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 
National Security Agency (NSA), Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) or designee, has granted a waiver. 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) discusses essentially the same mitigation as AG ¶ 23(a) under 
Guideline G, and applies for the reasons enumerated there. The arrests occurred two 
to eight years ago, and Applicant has changed his life in ways that reflect favorably on 
his trustworthiness, making a recurrence unlikely. AG ¶¶ 32(b), (c), and (e) are not 
relevant. 
 
 Applicant has demonstrated rehabilitation in numerous ways. The record 
contains no evidence of alcohol-related convictions since 2012. He has successfully 
completed his probation, which required random sobriety monitoring. He completed all 
the requirements of his sentence, except for the advisement period, which expires in 
six months. He has been involved in AA since just after his arrest. He has successfully 
completed therapy, and his counselor noted his remorse, and his commitment to a 
changed lifestyle. He has reduced the stresses that contributed to his excessive 
alcohol use. He received an excellent prognosis. He has been sober for two years. His 
life, references, and conduct show rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) applies.  
 
 
10 
Whole-Person Analysis 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative 
judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral change; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I also considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant's stressful, high-pressure job was a significant factor in his abuse of 
alcohol. He led an unbalanced lifestyle, pushing himself to unreasonable lengths to 
meet project goals, and using alcohol excessively. Applicant candidly admits his 
excessive alcohol use, which led to the arrest and confrontation with law enforcement. 
Although several months of the advisement period remain, Applicant has completed all 
other court requirements, and has changed his life. 
 
 He has rehabilitated his lifestyle to a more reasonable combination of home and 
work—he spends less time commuting to the off-site work location and more time with 
his family. He works no more than 40 hours, unless specifically required to do so. He 
has been sober for two years, and continues to attend AA meetings at least weekly. He 
is not only supported in his sober lifestyle by his own commitment, but by his sponsor, 
and his friends and coworkers. His military fitness reports show a history of 
commendable service during his Navy career. His employment awards show his 
employer lauds his work performance. His FSO recommends him based on his 
reliability for more than 14 years. In the Navy, and as a civilian, he has held security 
clearances for 30 years without a violation. Applicant’s sobriety demonstrates maturity 
and character, and his past conduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b   For Applicant   
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
