 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00542 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 4, 2014, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on May 6, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 12, 2014, setting the hearing for June 3, 
2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objections. The Government’s 
 
2 
 
exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits 
(AE) A through E, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 11, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and has worked for a government contractor for 12 
years. He has an associate’s degree. He is married and has two adult children. He 
served in the Army for four years from 1989 to 1993. He deployed during Operation 
Desert Storm. He was honorably discharged in the pay grade of E-4. He currently holds 
a secret security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on four accounts. The debts were listed 
on a credit report dated November 2013. Applicant admitted all the debts in his answer 
to the SOR (during his testimony he provided documentary evidence showing that SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were the same debt).2  
 
 Applicant’s financial troubles started in about 2009 or 2010. His wife owned and 
operated a small business that was adversely impacted by the slow economy at the 
time. In order to make ends meet, the family began using credit cards to help pay for 
necessary items such as groceries. The air conditioning unit for Applicant’s house broke 
down and had to be replaced. At this point, he knew he needed assistance to deal with 
his mounting debt. He contacted a debt consolidation company who advised him to stop 
paying his credit cards (up to that point he was making payments), pay their service 
$800 monthly, and they would begin settling his debts once enough money was 
accumulated in his account to do so. His total debt reached the point of about $53,000. 
Slowly, he began paying off the debt, which was down to about $26,000 when the SOR 
was issued. Applicant borrowed funds from his work-related retirement fund (called a 
salaried savings plan (SSP) under Internal Revenue Code 401(k)) and used those 
proceeds to pay all the SOR-related debts. He will pay back the loan over the course of 
the next four and a half years and the monthly payment ($122.12) will come directly out 
of his pay check.3   
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.c were all settled in May 2014. He also established that the debt listed in SOR 
¶ 1.b is a duplicate debt with SOR ¶ 1.d).4  
 
 Applicant’s current income is about $51,000 annually and he is current on all his 
other debt. He has a mortgage on his home, which is current, and he has no car 
payments. He has no tax issues. His wife’s business has recovered and makes a profit, 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 28, 33-34, 50; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 29; Answer; AE E. 
 
3 Tr. at 28-31, 39-40 41-42; AE A-B. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-30, 42-43; AE C-E. 
 
 
3 
 
at times. Other than hiring a debt consolidation company, he has not received credit 
counselling. He no longer uses credit cards.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 32-33, 43-49. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
5 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He has paid all debts. 
Since he has made a concerted effort to repair his financial position, it is reasonable to 
conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant became indebted when his wife’s small business was negatively 
impacted by the national recession in 2009 and 2010, and he incurred unexpected 
expenses in the form of having to replace his home air conditioning unit. These were 
conditions beyond his control and once he was able to do so, he acted responsibly by 
first contacting a debt consolidation company, and second, settling the debts. AG ¶ 
20(b) applies.  
 
 Although there is no evidence of credit counseling, there is ample evidence 
showing all the debts have been paid. He made a good-faith effort to resolve all the 
debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing all of the 
settlement payments. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, particularly his deployment during 
Operation Desert Storm. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the 
circumstances that led to his debts. He found a way to settle all of his outstanding SOR-
related debts as well as some additional debts. I found nothing to indicate a likelihood 
that Applicant would find himself in a similar future situation.  
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
