 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00059 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding his foreign passports and travel.   
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an April 4, 2014, response, Applicant admitted one of two allegations under 
Guideline C and denied the sole allegation raised under Guideline E. He also requested 
a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative 
judge. I was assigned the case on May 5, 2014. On May 9, 2014, DOHA issued a notice 
setting the hearing for May 28, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered one document, which was accepted into the record 
without objection as exhibit (Ex.) 1. A request for administrative notice (AN) of certain 
facts concerning the island nation of Cuba, consisting of three documents, was also 
offered and accepted into the record as AN Exs. I-III.  Applicant gave testimony and 
offered five documents, which were accepted into the record as Exs. A-E without 
objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on June 5, 2014. The 
record was then closed. Based on a thorough review of the case file, I find that 
Applicant carried his burden in mitigating security concerns. Consequently, eligibility for 
a security clearance is granted. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the island nation of Cuba. Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most 
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are 
either well known or from Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, 
Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative 
notice). Various facts pertaining to these nations were derived from the offered request 
and its attachments.  
 
The facts thus derived regarding The Republic of Cuba are as follows: In 1902, 
Spain granted Cuba its independence. Since 1959, Cuba has been a totalitarian state, 
which controls all aspects of life through the Communist party. The United States and 
Cuba have had a strained relationship since the early 1960s, when Fidel Castro forcibly 
took over the Cuban government after several years of armed struggle.  
 
Cuba is a multiracial society, which is primarily urban. Constitutional rights, such 
as freedom of speech and right to a fair trial, enjoyed by American citizens, are not 
enjoyed by Cuban citizens. Cuba views Cuban-born American citizens as Cuban 
citizens only.  
 
The Cuban government retains control through intense physical and electronic 
surveillance. The Cuban government has harassed its citizens for contacts with 
Americans. Human rights abuses occur, including abuse of detainees, unlawful killings 
and beatings, and threats and abuse of Cuban citizens. Political arrests and 
imprisonment continues.  
 
The U.S. continues the broad embargo established in the 1960s against trading 
with Cuba and continues to prohibit most commercial imports from Cuba. Between 1989 
and 1993, the Cuban gross national product declined by 35% following the loss of 
Soviet era subsidies. The Cuban economy is still recovering and is controlled by the 
state. In addition, the military plays a dominant role in the economy. Cuba currently 
 
 
 
 
3 
seeks to grow its economy, partially through tourism. The United States continues to 
maintain economic sanctions against the Cuban government.  
 
Cuba targets the United States for intensive espionage activities, and there have 
been numerous reported cases of Cuban espionage against the United States. With the 
loss of Soviet subsidies, Cuba has abandoned monetary support for guerilla 
movements, although it still maintains relations with several guerrilla and terrorist 
groups, sometimes providing refuge in Cuba for members of these groups. In 2011, the 
U.S. Department of State designated Cuba as one of four countries that are state 
sponsors of terrorism. The Department of State explains the basis of this continuing 
designation as follows:  
 
Designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism in 1982, the Government of 
Cuba maintained a public stance against terrorism and terrorist financing 
in 2010, but there was no evidence that it had severed ties with elements 
from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and recent 
media reports indicate some current and former members of the Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA) continue to reside in Cuba. Available 
information suggested that the Cuban government maintained limited 
contact with FARC members, but there was no evidence of direct financial 
or ongoing material support. In March, the Cuban government allowed 
Spanish Police to travel to Cuba to confirm the presence of suspected 
ETA members.  
 
Cuba continued to denounce U.S. counterterrorism efforts throughout the 
world, portraying them as a pretext to extend U.S. influence and power.  
 
Cuba has been used as a transit point by third-country nationals looking to 
enter illegally into the United States. The Government of Cuba is aware of 
the border integrity and transnational security concerns posed by such 
transit and investigated third country migrant smuggling and related 
criminal activities. In recent years, the government has allowed 
representatives of the Transportation Security Administration to conduct a 
series of airport security visits throughout the island.  
 
Legislation and Law Enforcement: Cuba did not pass new 
counterterrorism legislation in 2010. The Cuban government continued to 
aggressively pursue persons suspected of terrorist acts in Cuba. A Cuban 
court recently convicted Chavez Abarca on terrorism charges and 
sentenced him to 30 years in prison for his alleged role in a number of 
hotel and tourist location bombings in the 1990s. The Cuban Supreme 
Court commuted the death sentences of two Salvadorans, René Cruz 
León and Otto René Rodríguez Llerena, who had been convicted of 
terrorism, and sentenced them both to 30 years.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Regional and International Cooperation: Cuba did not sponsor 
counterterrorism initiatives or participate in regional or global operations 
against terrorists in 2010. 
 
In 1999, the U.S. opened travel to Cuba, including allowing Cuban-Americans to 
travel back to Cuba to visit family members. The new travel rules are governed by The 
Cuban Assets Control Regulations (see 31 C.F.R. 515), which are enforced and 
monitored by the U.S. Treasury Department. These regulations require all U.S. citizens 
traveling to Cuba to get a license. Visits to family members in Cuba require a specific 
license and the number of trips is limited. In addition, persons in the U.S. can send up to 
$300 every quarter to family members in the same household. Under recent U.S. policy, 
the U.S. presses for political, economic and democratic change in the Cuban lifestyle. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old salesman who recently completed his academic 
studies. He has worked for his present employer for about eight months. Applicant has 
an undergraduate degree in international relations and a graduate degree in 
anthropology. He speaks four languages fluently and has worked on academically- 
sponsored projects abroad. Applicant’s areas of interest include international affairs. He 
is presently an applicant for a position related to his studies at a governmental entity. 
Applicant is engaged and has no children.  
 
 Applicant’s parents met in Ecuador, where his mother resided as a citizen. She 
met Applicant’s father when he was employed by the French government and working 
in Ecuador. The couple married in France and, soon thereafter, they had two children: 
Applicant and his sibling. The children were born both French and Ecuadorian citizens 
due to parentage and place of birth. Applicant was raised speaking French and 
Spanish. Applicant has had Ecuadorian and French passports since infancy. (Tr. 48-50) 
When Applicant was about seven years old, his parents divorced. His mother took 
Applicant and his sibling to live with her back in Ecuador, where her extended family still 
lived. Applicant remained in Ecuador for about seven years.  
 
In Ecuador, Applicant’s mother met a businessman from the United States. After 
a couple of years of courtship, the man married Applicant’s mother. The newlyweds 
moved with her children to the United States. Applicant enrolled in the local high school, 
where he completed his junior and senior years. In 2008, Applicant became a 
naturalized United States citizen, after completing his associate’s degree at a local 
community college, but before transitioning to a four-year degree-conferring institution. 
As an upperclassman, Applicant participated in a month-abroad language and culture 
program in Brazil. While in Brazil, Applicant met his current girlfriend, who was a 
classmate. Through this period of Applicant’s academic career, he put himself through 
school by working at a local discount retailer.  
 
Applicant’s girlfriend is a citizen of Cuba and a naturalized citizen-resident of the 
United States. She maintains a U.S. passport. Her parents live in the United States and 
 
 
 
 
5 
are seeking U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 39) Near the end of Applicant’s undergraduate studies, 
Applicant’s girlfriend invited him to be her guest when she visited extended family in 
Cuba in early 2010. They were advised by a U.S.-based travel agent that the most 
expeditious way to ensure Applicant’s passage to Cuba was for them to cohabitate. As 
a cohabitant, Applicant would fall into a licensing category permitting cohabitants of 
Cuban citizens to accompany a Cuban citizen-applicant on a trip to Cuba. (Tr. 34-36; 
45-46) Applicant and his girlfriend moved in together, and she requested a license to 
bring him with her on their planned trip. The travel agent oversaw the more minute 
details of the licensure process. (Tr. 47) 
 
The couple flew to Cuba on an American airline from a major U.S. city. Applicant 
left the United States on his U.S. passport. (Tr. 48) As instructed by their U.S.-based 
travel agent, he used his French passport, which he had maintained since birth and 
which is valid through 2015, to enter Cuba. (Tr. 49) His girlfriend’s Cuban passport had 
been marked by U.S. officials, designating that her request for a travel guest license 
was granted. She also had a document designating Applicant as her travel companion 
and cohabitant. Applicant’s U.S. and French passports were submitted along with her 
materials to U.S. officials during the license application process. (Tr. 55-59) Copies of 
these materials were submitted to the airline before the trip.  
 
Once in Cuba, Applicant stayed with his girlfriend’s brother, who lives near 
Havana. The trip lasted a week. Applicant used his American passport to exit Cuba. (Tr. 
37) At the time, Applicant did not foresee that his use of a foreign passport might have 
adverse consequences regarding his future job opportunities. (Tr. 38). He has not used 
his French passport since this 2010 trip. 
 
After graduating from undergraduate school in June 2010, Applicant started 
looking at graduate programs in a larger, more metropolitan area. His girlfriend, who 
shares his interest in international relations, did the same. Applicant began his master’s 
program in January 2011. His girlfriend began her graduate program in the same area  
the following semester. During his graduate studies, Applicant participated in a one-year 
study-abroad program in Ecuador, working with American nongovernmental 
organizations (NGO) and local communities. It served as an integral part of his master’s 
program. Although Applicant has a U.S. passport issued in 2008, he renewed his 
Ecuadorian passport in early 2012 and used it to enter Ecuador. He did so to obviate 
the costs and inconvenience associated with renewing the visa as a foreign traveler 
every 90 days. (Tr. 31 51-52) Since he was putting himself through college, this cost-
saving measure was significant to him. (Tr. 52) During his time there, his girlfriend 
visited him twice, where she met some of Applicant’s extended family. 
 
In December 2013, Applicant was first sponsored for the position he is now 
seeking. At that time, Applicant turned over his Ecuadorian and French passports to his 
sponsor’s security officer. (Tr. 41) He did so when he was told that they could raise 
security concerns and that their surrender could smoothen the security review process. 
(Tr. 41-42) He did so willingly as he wishes to become an international development 
professional. (Tr. 42) Working for the agency currently offering him a position is one of 
 
 
 
 
6 
his “goals.” (Tr. 42) Applicant has no plans to again access his foreign passports. He 
does not want to use them anymore. (Tr. 52) He credibly stated that he does not intend 
to use anything but a U.S. passport for foreign travel in the future.  
 
Today, Applicant is pending a decision on his security clearance application. His 
girlfriend is completing her master’s degree in public policy. Although the two have 
dated for five years, they want to first find secure jobs in their chosen fields before 
committing to marriage. Applicant remains close to his mother and sibling, who remain 
in the United States. He and his girlfriend share a house in the United States. Applicant 
has no investments abroad. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has only travelled 
on his two foreign passports once each – to Cuba on a segment of his Cuban trip and 
for travel to Ecuador on the Ecuadorian passport. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
 
 
 
7 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include consideration of the possible 
risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard such information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern relating to 
Foreign Preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
Here, Applicant used his French passport to enter Cuba in 2010 and used his 
Ecuadorian passport to live in Ecuador during a year-abroad study program. Both 
passports are still valid. Therefore the following is applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 10(a) - exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. . . . 
 
Applicant acquired his French and Ecuadorian passports at or shortly after birth, 
based on parentage and his place of birth. Both were valid when he became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. He flew to Cuba with both his U.S. and French 
passports. He did so having first been authorized to visit Cuba by a U.S. governmental 
entity. This authorization came in the granting of a license, extended to Applicant’s 
girlfriend and to Applicant, as her cohabitant, after review of her Cuban and U.S. 
passports and his U.S. and French passports.  
 
Applicant used his U.S. passport departing the United States. It may be assumed 
that he presented that passport to the U.S. airline to match its passenger manifest. He 
entered Cuba with his French passport. Applicant renewed and used his Ecuadorian 
passport in 2012 in order to mitigate costs and facilitate convenience while studying 
abroad. While his renewal demonstrates an adult act to reap the benefits of foreign 
citizenship, it was done in pursuit of academic study and well before Applicant ever 
envisioned a career that might necessitate a security clearance. Regardless, he has 
 
 
 
 
8 
surrendered both foreign passports to a security officer, expressed his intent not to 
retrieve them, or to ever use any passport but the one issued to him by the United 
States. Therefore, I find that:  
 
AG ¶ 11(a) – the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated 
 
applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The SOR repeats under this guideline the first of two allegations noted under 
Guideline C. Specifically, SOR allegation ¶ 2.a states that Applicant used his “French 
passport to travel to Cuba in 2010, violating U.S. Federal regulations that prohibit U.S. 
citizens from traveling to Cuba without a license granted by the U.S. Government.” 
Applicant denied this allegation. His explanation of the process under which he and his 
girlfriend undertook for him to be a licensed companion is consistent with the regulatory 
process at issue. Applicant was credible in his retelling of that process. I find that none 
of the personal conduct disqualifying conditions apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under the above guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old man. He is well-educated, articulate, and highly 
credible. Born in France as a French and Ecuadorian citizen, he has been a naturalized 
 
 
 
 
9 
U.S. citizen since 2008. He has made the United States his home. His immediate family 
is here, his home is here, and both his fiancée and her family are here. Also here in the 
United States is the epicenter for the type of profession he seeks to enter. There is no 
indication he has a preference for living anywhere else. 
 
For nearly a decade, Applicant has pursued academic study, hands-on 
experiences, and the honing of multiple language skills to prepare himself for what has 
evolved into his passion – the field of international development. This is an uncommon 
field that brings together his various interests and talents. In preparation to seek a 
career in this field, he did not anticipate any future problems with his use of his foreign 
passports, nor was he advised that such activity could raise issues in the future. His use 
of these documents was for convenience and economy, reasons that generally provide 
little clout in mitigating foreign preference security concerns. Here, however, it was 
naїveté, not a conscious choice to demonstrate a preference for one country over 
another, that led him to use his foreign passports.  
 
Now apprised of the significance of his acts, Applicant appreciates his situation. 
He has willingly surrendered his foreign passports and credibly stated that he has no 
interest in either their return or ever traveling on anything but his U.S. passport. Now 
apprised of the qualifications for one seeking a security clearance, and given his plans 
to remain in the United States with his family, marry, and pursue his career goals here, I 
have no concern he will again exercise any act suggesting a foreign preference. 
Applicant has presented sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised. 
Clearance is granted  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
