 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00216 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark Lee Smith, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
On March 28, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on April 28, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 1, 2014. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled on May 19, 2014. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
 
2 
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through F that were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left 
open until June 2, 2014, to provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
documents. Applicant timely submitted AE G that was admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 4, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old computer systems administrator who works for a 
defense contractor. He has worked for his current employer since January 2011. He 
graduated from high school in June 2000 and earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2008. 
He served in the U.S. Air Force from July 2001 to July 2005 and received an honorable 
discharge. He married in June 2006 and divorced in October 2012. He has primary 
custody of his only child who is six years old. He has held a security clearance since 
about 2001 without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleged five delinquent debts totaling about $66,633 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.e). In his answer, Applicant denied each allegation. However, substantial evidence 
was admitted into the record that established the alleged debts.2 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce and to tenants who 
stopped paying rent. In 2008, Applicant and his wife purchased a home and had a 
monthly mortgage loan payment of $2,171. In 2009, they moved to another city because 
of a change in his employment and began renting the home for $1,700 per month. In 
July 2011, Applicant and his wife separated. She was not working at that time. In about 
August 2011, their tenants stopped paying the rent. Applicant then attempted to rent the 
property to new tenants and to obtain a modification of the mortgage loan, but those 
efforts were unsuccessful. After his wife obtained a job in December 2011, she informed 
him that she could not assist him with the mortgage loan payments. She eventually filed 
bankruptcy.3 
 
 About three months before his divorce in 2012, Applicant entered into a 
mediation agreement that provided he would make his wife’s car payments of $533 per 
month until the car was paid in full and then pay her $533 per month for an additional 12 
months. He also agreed to pay $600 per month as child support as well as pay his 
child’s school, day care, and summer camp expenses. The agreement designated 
which party would be responsible for certain debts and provided the responsible party 
would hold the other party harmless from any liability arising from an assigned debt. 
Applicant was unable to make the payments required under the mediation agreement 
                                                          
1 Tr. 40-42, 61-63, 95-96; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. 53-55, 96-97; GE 1-4; AE C, D, E; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
 
3 
 
as well as the mortgage payments. He fell behind on the mortgage loan payments and 
on other debts. The home was sold at a foreclosure sale in November 2011.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $522. This was a cellular telephone account 
that was placed for collection in November 2011. Applicant had a dispute with the 
creditor because he did not receive a telephone signal at his home. The creditor 
assured him the problem would be fixed. A delay was incurred as the creditor attempted 
to fix the problem. The delay caused Applicant to miss the 30-day expiration date for 
canceling the account and resulted in a deactivation fee. Applicant reached an 
agreement to settle the debt for $235 and paid that amount in December 2013.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – mortgage loan past due $56,465 in foreclosure with a balance owed 
of $318,300. This was the mortgage loan on the foreclosed home discussed above. The 
foreclosure sale resulted in a mortgage loan deficiency of $140,267. In January 2014, 
the mortgage company sent Applicant a letter advising that it had elected to write off the 
mortgage loan and hold all obligors harmless for the resulting deficiency balance. At the 
time of the hearing, Applicant had not received an Internal Revenue Service Form  
1099-C – Cancellation of Debt, but indicated that he would make arrangements to pay 
any taxes arising from that cancelled debt.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $9,374. This was a credit card account that 
had a date of last activity of July 2012. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated 
that this was his ex-wife’s account, and he was never responsible for it. When he 
contacted the creditor, he was informed that he had no obligation under this debt, but 
the creditor would not provide him any paperwork to that effect. At the hearing, he 
provided a copy of the mediation agreement that showed his wife had taken 
responsibility for this debt and agreed to hold him harmless for it. This debt was not 
listed on Applicant’s two most recent credit reports.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – past-due account for $149. This was a medical debt that was placed 
for collection in July 2008. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he paid 
this debt, but provided no paperwork showing it was paid. In his post-hearing 
submission, he provided a bank record that reflected he paid this debt on May 20, 
2014.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. 40-48, 53-55, 59-61, 64-66, 69-76, 82; GE 1-4; AE C, D, E; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant testified that his child support payment is $500 per month and is deduced directly from his pay 
check. See Tr. at 41, 82. 
 
5 Tr. 82-83; GE 1-4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
6 Tr. 48-51, 53, 64-66, 69-76, 83-84; GE 1-4; AE D; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
7 Tr. 45-48, 84-85; GE 2-4; AE C; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
8 Tr. 76-79, 81-82, 85-94; GE 1-3; AE G; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $123. This was a medical debt that was 
placed for collection in September 2011. Applicant provided documentation showing this 
debt was paid in May 2013.9 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence showing he received financial counseling. He 
provided a budget that showed his monthly net income was $6,257 and his monthly 
expenses and debt payments were $4,327, which left him a net monthly remainder of 
$1,930. When he shares rent with a roommate, his net monthly remainder increased to 
$2,380. At the time of the hearing, he had a roommate. He also presented a 
spreadsheet that tracked monthly the amount of his overall debt from February 2012 to 
May 2014. The spreadsheet revealed that his overall debt has been reduced from 
$83,833 to $53,127 during that period. In a Personal Financial Statement, Applicant 
reported he had $24,410 in stocks and bonds.10 
 
 In about 2011, Applicant and his wife received a tax refund of about $3,800 from 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). He cashed the refund check and gave his wife half 
of the proceeds. Later the IRS determined the refund was issued in error. At that time, 
Applicant did not have the money available to repay the refund in full. He entered into a 
repayment agreement with the IRS to repay that money. This debt was not alleged in 
the SOR.11 
 
 Three coworkers testified that they knew Applicant both professionally and 
personally. They indicated that Applicant was fiscally responsible and kept charts of his 
finances and spending habits. One indicated that Applicant was very prudent with his 
spending and never made spurious purchases. In general, they described him as frugal. 
All of them considered him reliable and trustworthy. In a letter, Applicant’s roommate 
stated that Applicant lives within his means.12 
 
 While in the Air Force, Applicant served in Iraq. He received three Air Force 
Achievement Medals and was selected as an Airman of the Quarter and 
Communication Information Systems Airman of the Year.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
9 Tr. 81-82, 90-91, 101; GE 1-3; AE D; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
10 Tr. 38-42, 56-59, 96-97; GE 2; AE B, F. 
 
11 Tr. 68-69, 102; GE 2.  
 
12 Tr. 16-37; AE A.  
 
13 Tr. 78, 103. 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
over a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife separated in July 2011 and divorced in October 2012. 
In August 2011, their tenants stopped paying rent. The breakup of Applicant’s marriage 
and the failure of his tenants to pay rent were conditions beyond his control. When the 
tenants stopped paying the rent, Applicant could not afford to make payments on his 
mortgage loan and also meet his other financial commitments. He attempted 
unsuccessfully to rent the property to others and to modify the mortgage loan payments. 
The home was eventually sold at a foreclosure sale. The mortgage creditor has written 
off the mortgage loan and agreed to hold Applicant harmless for the mortgage loan 
 
7 
 
deficiency. Applicant may incur a tax liability arising from the foreclosure, but indicated 
that he will appropriately address that issue. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.   
 
 Applicant has settled and resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. AG ¶ 
20(d) applies to those debts. 
 
As part of his divorce, Applicant entered into a mediation agreement in which he 
assumed responsibility for some of the marital debts and agreed to pay child support 
and temporary alimony. He is meeting those commitments. In that agreement, his ex-
wife assumed responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. When the issue of Applicant’s 
responsibility for that debt arose, he called the creditor and was informed that he was 
not responsible for that debt. His two latest credit reports do not list that debt. He 
provided sufficient documentary evidence to show that he has a legitimate basis for 
disputing that debt. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 1.c.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served on active duty in the Air Force in Iraq and received three Air 
Force Achievement Medals for his military service. He is a responsible father who has 
primary custody of his child. He encountered financial setbacks but has taken 
reasonable steps to resolve those problems. He is living within his means and 
developed a plan for eliminating his debt. His financial situation is stable and improving.  
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
