 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-00159 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the allegations. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 9, 
2014, and I convened the hearing on May 28, 2014. I admitted four Government 
exhibits (GE 1-4), and two exhibits offered by the Applicant (AE A-B). I held the record 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which 
an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
2 
open, and Applicant timely submitted one additional exhibit after the hearing, admitted 
without objection, as AE C. DOHA received the transcript on June 6, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 29 years old and unmarried. From 2003 to 2008, he attended college 
and completed a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering. He received a master’s 
degree in engineering management in 2010. From July 2008 to April 2011, he worked 
as an engineer for a military agency. In 2008, when he was 21 years old, he received 
his first security clearance at the secret level.2 From April 2011 to March 2013, he was 
unemployed, and began an online retail business. However, it did not produce income. 
He started his current employment with a defense contractor in March 2013, where he 
works as a program analyst and engineer. (GE 1; Tr. 17-18, 48-49) 
 
Before starting his job at the military agency in 2008, Applicant had a pre-
employment drug test. He testified that he was aware of the agency’s policy prohibiting 
illegal drug use. Between 2008 and 2011, he had two to three additional random drug 
tests. Results of all of these tests were negative. Applicant testified that the employees 
were often subject to random drug testing “[d]ue to the frequent use of explosives, so 
the chances of getting hurt was real high.” (Tr. 19-22) 
 
During a weekend in March 2011, when he visited his family in another state, he 
used marijuana for the first time. He was 26 years old. He smoked it three or four times 
that weekend with a cousin. At the end of the party, he realized he had made a mistake. 
He has not used marijuana since. After returning to work, he did not inform his security 
officer of his illegal conduct. He underwent a random drug test on March 15, 2011. The 
testing company informed Applicant that he had failed the test. Applicant informed his 
supervisor, who stated that the security office would be notified. On March 28, 2011, 
Applicant's access to classified information was suspended pending a security 
determination, his badges were confiscated, and he was escorted off base. (GE 2, 3, 4; 
Tr. 19-22, 34-35, 39, 54-55) 
 
Applicant was informed he could resign or he could appeal the test results. If the 
results were confirmed, Applicant would be fired and would be ineligible for future 
federal employment. According to his July 2013 statement in his SF 86-C, Applicant 
believed that if he lost the appeal, he would be subject to disciplinary action, but if he 
resigned, no incident report would be filed and his record “would remain clean.” 
Applicant discussed his options with his supervisor and his family. He resigned on April 
7, 2011. (GE 3, 4; Tr. 22-24) 
 
                                                 
2 The record is ambiguous as to the date of Applicant's first security clearance. His application shows 
2006, but Applicant testified the year was 2008. (GE 1; Tr. 18)  
 
 
3 
In June 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance application for his current 
position with a defense contractor. (GE 1) He answered “No” to the following question:  
 
Section 13C – Employment Record 
Have any of the following happened to you in the last seven (7) years 
[emphasis in original]?  
• Fired from a job? 
• Quit a job after being told you would be fired? 
• Have you left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations 
of misconduct? 
• Left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance? 
• Received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or 
disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as violation of a security 
policy? 
 
Before answering Section 13C, Applicant contacted the human resources 
department at the military agency to ensure that “[n]o trail of this information existed” 
and he was assured that it did not. He asked if his resignation should be reported, and 
was informed he did not need to report it. He also contacted the security officer for the 
military agency, who told him that he had no disciplinary record on file, because he had 
resigned. Applicant testified, 
 
This is the main reason as to why I did not originally report it on my SF-86 
application. Since there was no incident report shown on my [DOD 
personnel] record and no disciplinary action was taken against me at the 
time, I did not feel the question was truly applicable in my situation. (GE 3) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant stated, “Nonetheless, it was my decision what to put on this 
form, and . . . I should have known to put Yes.” (Tr. 24-25) 
 
In Section 13A, regarding employment and unemployment history, the security 
clearance application asked why Applicant left his position at the military agency, and 
the reason for his subsequent unemployment. To both questions, he answered the 
following:  
 
Resignation from previous position as Engineer at [agency]. The 
resignation was due to a search of different career opportunities within the 
field of engineering.3 (GE 1, Tr. 26) 
                                                 
3 The SOR does not allege falsification of the employment/unemployment question. I will not rely on 
Applicant's answers to these questions to reach conclusions, but only for the limited purposes outlined 
by the Appeal Board: Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's 
credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; 
(c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a 
 
 
4 
Applicant also answered “No” to the following questions: 
 
Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity 
• In the last seven (7) years [emphasis in original], have you illegally used 
any drugs or controlled substances? 
 
• Have you EVER [emphasis in original] illegally used or otherwise been 
involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance other than previously listed? 
 
Section 25: Investigation and Clearance Record 
• Have you EVER [emphasis in original] had a security clearance 
eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked? 
 
Applicant testified that he answered “No” to these questions because he had 
been told, 
 
[T]here was no record of what had happened, and knowing that I’m not a 
habitual drug user, this is why I put “No” on the form. I felt like if I brought 
– I didn’t want to bring something up again that had just been haunting me 
for the past three years—or two years—before I could even get a job with 
[current company]. . . . Nonetheless, the question is clearly stated, and I 
should have filled out Yes. (Tr. 26-28) 
 
Shortly after Applicant completed his security clearance application in June 2013, 
his security officer notified him that his application had been flagged because of an 
incident report. Applicant told the security officer the likely cause. He was instructed to 
contact his security officer at the military agency, who suggested he complete a Form 
SF-86C “Standard Form 86 Certification” to correct his answers. In July 2013, he 
completed the SF-86C, revealing his drug use and his resignation from the military 
agency because of the positive drug test. In the SF-86C, he stated he had 
misinterpreted Section 23. He also stated that he had no intention to deliberately 
withhold any information or to be misleading during his clearance investigation. In his 
2014 Answer to the SOR, he repeated that he had no intent to withhold information or 
mislead the Government. (Answer; GE 3, 4; Tr. 28-33, 51-53) 
 
 In September 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an agent of the Office of 
Personnel Management.4 The agent was unaware of Applicant's SF-86C, and Applicant 
volunteered the information about his drug use, positive drug test, and subsequent 
resignation. He also stated that he chose not to disclose his drug test and resignation 
                                                                                                                                                            
particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole 
person analysis under Directive Section 6.3. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
4 Applicant testified that he had reviewed the report of his security interview, and confirmed that it 
accurately reflected his statements during the interview. (Tr. 29-30) 
 
 
5 
because he feared it would jeopardize his security clearance. Applicant stated that he 
told his parents and two friends the reason he lost his job, but he was embarrassed 
about the events, and informed all others that he had been laid off due to government 
cutbacks. At the hearing, he stated that he told close family members, but not others.  
 
Yeah. I mean, I felt as if at the time I – I was living a lie. I wasn’t telling 
people why I had left my former job. I had just told them I had resigned for 
personal reasons, you know, kept it real vague. (Tr. 36-37) 
 
He testified that he became depressed at how his life had changed from “doing real well 
for myself, to all of a sudden just having nothing, for one evening. Or for a weekend. 
And it wasn’t worth it.” He explained that he remained embarrassed about the events for 
years. At his security interview, he stated he made a poor choice when he concealed 
these events because of his shame and fear. His parents, some family members, his 
supervisor and security officer, several friends, and coworkers are now aware of the 
events. He testified that now that he has revealed it, he feels stronger, is working again 
in his field, and is free from his former embarrassment. (GE 4; Tr. 31-32, 36-37, 39)  
 
When questioned at the hearing, Applicant admitted that if he had not had the 
random drug test, he would most likely not have informed his security officer about his 
marijuana use and resignation. In his July 2013 SF 86-C, he stated he “never had any 
intention of deliberately withholding any information from my clearance investigation.” 
Three months later, at his September 2013 security interview, he admitted that he 
deliberately sought to conceal his history because he was embarrassed and he feared 
losing his security clearance. However, in his March 2014 Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated he had “[n]o intention of withholding any information or being 
misleading in efforts of completing this investigation application. (Answer; GE 3; Tr. 34-
35) 
 
 Applicant offered a document showing the results of a pre-employment drug test 
for his current position on March 18, 2013. The results were negative for five different 
drug types, including marijuana. Applicant also submitted his performance evaluation for 
his first year with his current employer. It was completed in February 2014. It notes he 
has succeeded at difficult challenges, and is a valued asset for the customer. His overall 
rating was 7.71 of a possible 8. The evaluation also states he “[h]as never required 
counseling or correction for any action in conflict with [company’s] policies.” Applicant 
also submitted a memorandum dated March 2013, which noted that a review of his 
current personnel records shows no adverse information. (AE A, B, C; Tr. 44-45, 56, 59) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
 
 
6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, 
commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a 
disqualifying or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an 
applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can 
be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the 
information presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline E (personal conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
                                                 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance 
process. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant tested positive for marijuana and 
knowingly falsified answers concerning his illegal drug use, employment, and security 
clearance history on his 2013 security clearance application. The following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are relevant: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . ; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
Applicant admits that on his 2013 security clearance application, he deliberately 
falsified answers to four questions concerning his illegal drug use, his use while holding 
a security clearance, his resignation for failing a drug test, and the suspension of his 
security clearance. Applicant stated in his security interview and at the hearing that 
between 2011 and 2013 he was “living a lie,” and did not tell most people because he 
was embarrassed by his conduct. Applicant was vulnerable to exploitation because he 
feared disclosure of his secret and the effect disclosure would have on his personal 
and professional standing. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e) apply.  
 
Applicant testified that he violated his employer’s drug policy when he used an 
illegal drug in 2011, implicating AG ¶ 16(f). However, the disqualifying condition refers 
to a “written or recorded commitment made by the individual,” and the evidence does 
not include evidence of such a written agreement. AG ¶ 16(f) does not apply. 
 
 Guideline E contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. The 
following conditions under AG ¶ 17 are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
8 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) The individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant did not make good-faith efforts to disclose his drug use and 
resignation on his 2013 security clearance application. Only after he was informed that 
his security clearance application was flagged in his DOD personnel record did he 
reveal his history to his supervisor and security officer. He did complete an SF 86-C to 
correct his application, but only because his security officer instructed him to do so. He 
testified that, had he not been tested it is unlikely he would have disclosed his 
marijuana use. Applicant's conduct did not show a good-faith desire to disclose his 
history. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant's conduct is recent. He falsified his security clearance application 
approximately one year ago. He did not disclose the truth until nine months ago, when 
the flagged application forced him to reveal it. He testified that if his application had not 
been flagged, it is unlikely he would have revealed the truth. Deliberate falsification of 
information provided to the Government is not minor; it goes to the heart of the security 
clearance process. Moreover, although Applicant revealed his conduct, he stated as 
recently as March 2014, that he never intended to mislead the Government. Yet, he 
contradicted this assertion in September 2013 and at the hearing, by stating he 
deliberately concealed his history because it would negatively affect his clearance 
eligibility. Applicant's contradictory statements undermine a claim of rehabilitation, and 
reflect negatively on his trustworthiness and judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) cannot be applied. 
 
 Applicant has taken positive steps by revealing his conduct to his employer, 
family, and several friends and coworkers, who are now aware of his history of illegal 
drug use, positive drug test, and resignation. Applicant is no longer vulnerable to 
coercion, and AG ¶ 17(e) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of 
the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
 
 
9 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant's history includes positive factors that weigh in his favor, including his 
abstinence from marijuana use since 2011, and his positive performance evaluation 
from his supervisor.  
 
 However, the negative factors are more significant. When Applicant used 
marijuana, he had held a security clearance for three years. He was aware that 
marijuana use was illegal, and that he had jeopardized his security clearance by 
violating the law. He was aware of his duty to report security-significant behavior. 
Finally, when he completed the security clearance application in 2013, he was aware of 
his duty to provide frank and complete answers during clearance investigations. 
Despite his awareness, he knowingly chose to falsify his security clearance application 
by concealing his illegal drug use, his failed drug test, and his resulting clearance 
suspension and resignation. He also chose to conceal these facts from his supervisor, 
his security officer, and from DOD. He violated the security clearance holder’s 
obligation to self-report, because he feared the consequences for his career and his 
personal standing. 
 
 Those who hold security clearances enter into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust. Applicant's conduct demonstrates willingness to place his 
own desires above the Government’s need for honesty and trustworthiness in those to 
whom it grants access to classified information. 
 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
