The Government submitted five items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 14-00104
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr. Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On March 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated April 22, 2014.  Applicant received the FORM on April 29,1
2014. He submitted additional information for the record, which was marked as AX A-B.
I received the case assignment on June 9, 2014. Based on a review of the case file, I
find Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised. Security clearance is
denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F,
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d., with explanations.  (Item 2) 
Applicant is 37 years old. He is a software system safety engineer with a defense
contractor. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in May 2000. Applicant is married, and he
has three children. (Item 5) Applicant has been employed with his current employer
since February 2003. On August 19, 2013, he completed a security clearance
application. (Item 4) 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,118. These
include collection accounts, and a past-due account. (Item 1) A credit report confirms
the debts. (Item 5) 
Applicant explained in his Answer, that his financial issues began in
approximately July 2011 due to “an increase in basic cost of living.” The record reflects
that he has had steady employment since February 2003, but he is the sole provider for
his family. Applicant acknowledged that he was receiving calls from various collection
agencies, and his intent was to fully pay his debts but he stated that he is basically
living “paycheck to paycheck.” He has reduced his living expenses (cable, life
insurance) to help pay his delinquent debts. Finally, Applicant stated that his financial
strain continues due to car repairs, pre-school tuition for his son, medical expenses,
and payments on the largest of his delinquent debts. He plans to home school his
children. The record reflects that Applicant has made sporadic payments on all
accounts. He noted that he wanted to pay the largest account first (SOR 1.a). His credit
report listed several accounts that are “paid as agreed.”
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in the amount of $10,421 has been a collection
account since 2012. Applicant was not successful in his attempts to modify the payment
amount. He made a payment of $470 in January 2012, but was not able to make
another payment ($100) until May 2012. At that point, another collection agency bought
the account. In June 2012, the account was again sold and Applicant negotiated
payments of $200 a month beginning in June 2012. Applicant continued some
payments until May 10, 2013. In August 2013, Applicant received a call from a third
collection group. Applicant stated that the company did not confirm the validity of the
debt, but offered Applicant an opportunity to resume payments. Applicant recalls that he
contacted them with his checking account information, but they did not return his call.
Applicant states he did not receive further information from them. He stopped making
payments. However, in 2013, a lawsuit was filed against Applicant for the balance of the
account. He secured legal service and on March 14, 2014, a settlement offer was
made. Applicant was given three months to pay the debt.(Exhibit in File; Attachment to
Answer) Applicant made a $3,000 payment on April 21, 2014. He made a $500
payment on May 14, 2014. (AX A) 
3
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account for $7,484. The 2013 credit
report shows no activity on the account since 2011. Applicant contacted the collection
company in March 2014 and arranged a payment plan of $50 a month. He made the
first $50 payment in March 2014, automatically debited from his checking account.
Applicant provided his bank statement to confirm a $50 payment in April, 2014. (AX A)
In September 2014, Applicant and the collection company will renegotiate a settlement
amount. 
Applicant has arranged a repayment agreement with the creditor of the debt
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for  $2,213. Applicant’s first payment of $100 was made in
February 2014. The plan schedule is for one year. Applicant presented documentation
that he made another payment of $231.91 in February 2014. Applicant submitted his
bank account statement that confirms the $129.08 monthly amount is automatically
deducted from his account. (Exhibit in File) 
The debt alleged in SOR 1.d for a past-due account for $51 is paid. Applicant
presented a letter confirming that as of March 2014 the account has been closed and
the balance is zero. In fact, the $51 was the result of a $.12 shortage from the last
payment that created late fees of $51.12. The bank waived the late fees. Applicant has
satisfied the debt. (Exhibit in File)
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement listing a total monthly net
income of $6,635. After total household expenses and debt repayment, he has a net
monthly remainder of $373. (AX B) He has a savings allotment of $664 which he uses
for debt repayment. He saves about 10% of his net monthly income each month.
Applicant stated that he read a book concerning a way to get out of debt. (Item 5)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. “An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.”
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish his delinquent debts in the
amount of $20,000. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions
(FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c)
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is
left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” An unpaid debt is a
continuous course of conduct for the purposes of DOHA adjudications. See, eg, ISCR
Case No. 10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012) Applicant still has a significant
amount of delinquent debt. The delinquent obligations remain. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant did not provide
information to prove that the delinquencies were beyond his control and that he acted
responsibly until recently. He did not show a nexus between the events he described
and his inability or unwillingness to pay on the delinquent accounts. In response to the
FORM, Applicant presented new information concerning his payment plans and
amounts that he has paid. He has paid one account and the others are in repayment
status.  
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant stopped his sporadic
payments in 2013 on his largest delinquent debt. Due to lack of adequate progress on
the debt, he was sued in 2013. He obtained legal counsel and resumed in 2014
(Stipulation of Judgment). He did not pay any of the other delinquent debts during that
time. He produced  documentation to show that now he has a plan for the remaining
delinquent debts. He did not present evidence that he received financial counseling. AG
¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem) does not
apply. He has only recently made efforts to address his delinquent debts. I find that
there are not clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are
under control. He has not met his burden of proof.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
6
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 37 years old. He has worked for his current employer since 2003.  While he
made reference to his increase in basic costs of living, his son’s education, and major
car repairs, he failed to provide any specific information connecting his financial
indebtedness to circumstances beyond his control. Moreover, he did not demonstrate
that he has taken responsible steps toward the resolution of his debts until very
recently. Approximately two years after Applicant was aware of his debts, he began to
address them in earnest. He has now taken steps to resolve his delinquent debts.  
Applicant’s steady employment since 2003 and his lack of payments to creditors
for almost two years, creates significant doubts about the eventual resolution of the
SOR debts and his overall solvency and financial integrity. Since his Answer to the SOR
in March 2014, he put  a plan in place to address his financial issues. He stated his
intent to pay all his debts. His long term pattern of financial irresponsibility and his
failure to take action to resolve his debts for two years do not show good judgment or
reliability. This conclusion, however, does not preclude Applicant from demonstrating
the requisite financial rehabilitation and reform in the future. 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am
unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance or credibility. In relying on the written
record, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to supplement the record
with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and
mitigate the financial security concerns.  
The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his security clearance does
not necessarily indicate anything adverse about an applicant’s character or loyalty. It
means that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to meet the strict
standards controlling access to classified information. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
