 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08815 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AGs. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 15, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 8, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and did not offer any documents. The record was held open until 
June 22, 2017, to allow Applicant to submit documents. Applicant submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection, and the record 
closed.2 DOHA received the hearing transcript on June 16, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is married and has two grown children. He 
graduated from a military service academy and later earned a master’s degree in 
business administration. He retired from the service in June 2001. He is employed by a 
federal contractor.3  
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to file his federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2000 through 2005. He testified that he had no good reason for his failure 
to file, but he did not think he owed taxes. He stated he made the conscious decision 
not to file. He admitted he procrastinated for five years, was disorganized, and made an 
error. He testified that he has filed federal and state tax returns from 2006 through 
2016.4  
 
 Applicant did not contact the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or the state tax 
authority and file his delinquent income tax returns. Rather in July 2011, the IRS levied 
a wage garnishment with his employer for $209,551. He testified that he believed the 
amount he initially owed was small; approximately $2,500 for each delinquent year, and 
the balance owed included interest and penalties. Applicant testified that through 
garnishment he has been paying this debt since July 2011. The monthly amount is 
currently $1,461. He provided supporting documents. He stated that the current balance 
owed on the levy is approximately $24,000. He did not provide an IRS document to 
show the current balance owed.5  
 
 Applicant is indebted to his home state for tax liens that were filed against him in 
June 2005, in the approximate amount of $931; July 2008, in the approximate amount 
                                                          
2 Hearing exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
3 Tr. 16-17. 
 
4 Tr. 18-19, 27, 29. 
 
5 Tr. 19-25; AE A, B, C. 
 
3 
 
 
of $872; and June 2011, in the approximate amount of $11,750. They are all unpaid. 
Applicant testified that after his federal tax lien in paid, he plans to pay the state tax 
liens. His home state has not garnished his wages to pay these liens, but he testified 
that the debts were being transferred to a collection company. He believed the current 
balance owed was about $20,000. The collection company has contacted him regarding 
his state tax liens, but he is unable to pay them at this time.6  
 
 Applicant testified that when his wages were garnished he had difficulty paying 
his mortgage. His home was foreclosed. There was no deficiency owed. He stated he 
has minimized his living expenses. He receives about $30,000 from his military pension 
and about $73,000 from his current employment.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 25-27, 31-34. 
 
7 Tr. 32, 34-35. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2000 through 2005 federal and state income tax 
returns. Applicant never filed the delinquent tax returns, but rather it was the IRS that 
contacted him in 2011 and filed a tax lien. Applicant incurred a large federal tax lien and 
state tax liens. His wages have been garnished since 2011 to satisfy the federal tax lien. 
The state tax liens remain unresolved. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is compliance with those 
arrangements.  
  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant had no explanation for his failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns other than he procrastinated. He did not contact the IRS or his state tax 
authority to resolve the matter. Rather, the IRS contacted him in July 2011 and 
involuntarily garnished his wages. He provided no information that he has contacted the 
state tax authority to resolve the state liens, but has received notice from the collection 
company that now holds the debts. He testified he intended to pay the state liens after 
his federal lien is resolved. Applicant repeated his behavior for six years and then it was 
another six years before the IRS levied the lien. Applicant’s conduct was frequent and 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control. 
Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial 
counseling. There is evidence that through garnishment, Applicant has been paying his 
federal tax lien. There is no evidence that Applicant has contacted his state to resolve 
his state liens, but he stated he intended to do so after he paid the federal lien. AG ¶ 
20(c) has some application.  
 
 Applicant failed to address his delinquent tax filings and federal tax debt until the 
IRS garnished his wages. He did not initiate the effort to resolve his tax problems. 
Garnishment does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay his tax obligations. I find 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. I find AG ¶ 20(g) has minimal application because the effort 
to resolve the federal tax lien came from the IRS through an involuntary garnishment of 
Applicant’s wages. There is no evidence he contacted his state tax authority about 
arranging to pay the state tax liens, but he testified he intends to do so when his federal 
lien is satisfied.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) was 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old highly educated military veteran. He chose not to file 
his federal and state income tax returns for six years and incurred tax liens. He did not 
voluntarily make an effort to resolve his tax problems, but rather it was through a tax lien 
imposed by the IRS and the garnishment of his wages that his federal tax lien has been 
reduced. He has not yet addressed his state tax liens. Applicant’s conduct raises 
questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
