 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05489 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 11, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
19, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 23, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted exhibits (AE) E through G, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b and 1.d-1.q. He denied the remaining 
allegations. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
the same position, for different contractors, for 11 years. He has a bachelor’s degree. 
He served in the Air Force from 1986 until 1994, when he was honorably discharged as 
a sergeant (pay grade E-4). He divorced his wife in 1994. There were no children from 
this marriage. From 2008 to 2012, his girlfriend and her five children lived with him. He 
supported his girlfriend and her family because she did not work.2  
 
 The SOR alleges two dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcies, one unpaid judgment, 
and 16 delinquent debts. The unpaid judgment and debts total $24,330. The debts were 
listed in credit reports from March 2012, September 2014, and December 2016. Court 
records document the Chapter 13 bankruptcy cases.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to health issues he experienced 
beginning in about 2010. In 2010, he underwent emergency surgery for an abdominal 
condition. His recovery period caused him to miss about a month of work, but he was on 
paid leave at the time. He continued to experience pain from 2011 through 2013, but 
continued to work and take sick leave as long as it lasted. In 2013, his pain was so 
significant that he stopped working altogether and was placed on short-term disability 
for 90 days. Once the 90 days were up, he applied for long-term disability payments, but 
his claim was denied. He resigned his position in December 2013 because he could not 
work with the pain he was experiencing. He used his 401K retirement account to 
support himself during this period of unemployment. He also received unemployment 
benefits. He was able to get treated by the VA, which eventually led to his rehiring. 
Although his period of unemployment is not stated in the record, his pay statement from 
his current employer shows that he was reemployed for the entirety of 2015. This would 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 6-7, 29, 31-33; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2-10. 
 
 
3 
 
put his period of unemployment at approximately 12 to 13 months (December 2013 to 
January 2105).4 
 
 Applicant also explained that his then-girlfriend used money from their joint 
account to gamble. She took so much out that he was unable to pay his mortgage 
payment on occasion. He sought bankruptcy protection initially in 2010 because he got 
behind on his mortgage payments and he was threatened with foreclosure by the 
lender. After both his Chapter 13 bankruptcies were dismissed for nonpayment, his 
home was foreclosed in November or December 2014. Additionally, he incurred federal 
tax liability for withdrawing funds from his 401K account. Applicant presented a written 
budget and received financial counseling through the bankruptcy process.5  
 
 The status of the SOR-related allegations is as follows:    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b (2010 and 2012 Chapter 13 bankruptcies). 
 
 Applicant failed to make payments under his approved bankruptcy plan on two 
separate filings and both cases were dismissed. No debts were discharged.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (automobile repossession account $12,648). 
 
 Applicant admitted purchasing a vehicle for which he could not make the 
payments. He voluntarily surrendered the vehicle. When he was contacted by the 
creditor about payments, he disputed the amount he owed after the repossession. 
Applicant did not produce documentary evidence to support his dispute. He also did not 
produce evidence of payment, establishment of a payment plan or documented 
correspondence with the creditor. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.p (medical collection accounts $1,286). 
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence showing that he has paid several of 
these medical accounts and he is working on paying the remaining accounts. These 
debts are resolved or being resolved.8 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 34-39, 41; AE C-D, G. 
 
5 Neither Applicant’s federal tax debt nor his mortgage foreclosure were alleged in the SOR. I will 
not use this information for disqualifying purposes, but I will use it to determine credibility, whether 
mitigating conditions are applicable, and in application of the whole-person factors. Tr. 45, 58-60; GE 2, 7; 
AE B, E. 
 
6 GE 2, 7. 
 
7 Tr. at 65; answer; GE 8. 
 
8 Tr. at 67; answer; AE A, F. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q (motorcycle repossession account $7,548). 
 
 Applicant admitted purchasing the motorcycle. He stated he could not afford the 
payments when he got sick and contacted the creditor to come pick it up. No one has 
come for the bike and he made no further efforts to pay the amount owed or set up a 
payment plan to resolve the account. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.r (credit card collection account $1,843). 
 
 Applicant denied this debt in his answer. He claimed that his ex-wife forged his 
signature to open this account. During his testimony, he admitted this debt and 
indicated that his wages were garnished to pay it. He provided proof that his wages 
were garnished, however, there is nothing to indicate that the garnishment was for the 
SOR debt. Neither the letter from his employer informing him of the garnishment action, 
nor his earnings statement identify the recipient of the garnished funds. Additionally, the 
amount garnished does not equal the amount of this SOR debt. This debt is 
unresolved.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.s (judgment $1,005). 
 
 Applicant disputes this rent-related debt claiming that he gave proper notice 
before vacating the property. He did not provide written documentation to support his 
dispute. The judgment has not been paid. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
Character Evidence. 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of his supervisor who is also his current 
landlord. The supervisor stated that Applicant was an excellent performer and 
recommended him for a clearance. As a tenant, Applicant has been on time with his 
rent and has not been a problem. He believes Applicant is back on track financially.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 72-73; GE 10. 
 
10 Tr. at 80; answer; GE 8-10. 
 
11 Tr. at 72-73; GE 10. 
 
12 Tr. at 90-93. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
6 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also failed 
to make payments under his Chapter 13 bankruptcies. I find all the above disqualifying 
conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and his inaction in addressing the 
larger debts shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has 
addressed the smaller medical debts. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s period of unemployment from December 2013 to January 2015, and 
his girlfriend’s gambling are circumstances beyond his control. Other than paying some 
of the smaller balance medical debts, Applicant has done nothing to address the larger 
debts and the judgment. Overall, the record evidence does not support that Applicant’s 
actions were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
  
 Applicant received financial counseling. Given the unpaid status of all but one 
debt, Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Although he resolved or is 
resolving the small medical debts, the remainder of his debts remain unresolved with no 
established repayment plan. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the 
remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. Applicant failed to 
document any disputes. ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service, his military service, the 
testimony of his witness, and the circumstances by which he became indebted. I also 
 
8 
 
considered that he paid several of his delinquent medical debts. However, I also 
considered that he has made little effort to resolve his remaining debt. He also has 
federal tax debt, his home was foreclosed, and he could not make his required 
bankruptcy plan payments. He has not established a meaningful track record of debt 
management, which causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.d – 1.p:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.q – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
