KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline L; Guideline F
DIGEST: We conclude that the Judge erred in denying admission of the CPA letter. In light of
the above, we remand the case for the Judge to consider the CPA letter and issue a new decision.
If the case is remanded to a different Judge, he or she should inquire of the parties whether a new
hearing is required or whether the Judge can rely on the transcript of the hearing contained in the
case file. In light of this holding, the other issues that Applicant has raised are not ripe for
consideration. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 12-10335.a1
DATE: 07/21/2017
DATE: July 21, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-10335
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Adam R. Webber, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 26, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline L (Outside
Activities), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On March 8, 2016, Department Counsel amended the SOR
to add an additional allegations under Guideline F.  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 21,
2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
whether the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence; whether the Government presented
substantial evidence of one of the Guideline F allegations, and whether the Judge’s whole-person
analysis was erroneous.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines B and L are not at issue
in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we remand the case for a new decision.
Applicant has raised an issue of due process.  In doing so, he asserts matters from outside
the record, which we are generally not permitted to consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we
will consider new evidence insofar as it bears upon threshold issues such as jurisdiction or due
process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00812 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2015).
Applicant asserts, and Department Counsel does not deny, that Applicant’s attorney
requested a continuance of the hearing, due to his having been retained only a few days prior.  The
Judge denied the request.  At the end of the hearing, the Judge stated that he had denied the request
because it did not state good cause.  Tr. at 193.  However, he advised that he would hold the record
open for four weeks to enable Applicant to present additional matters: 
[Y]ou can send me anything that’s relevant and probative . . . because you asked for
the continuance and you were just hired last week, I’ll give you a month to . . .
present to me anything that you think is relevant and probative.  Tr. at 195.  
After the hearing, Applicant provided documents to the Judge.  These documents included
a letter by a certified public accountant (CPA).  Department Counsel objected to this document on
the ground that it was hearsay and that the CPA should have been made available at the hearing for
cross-examination.  Government Objections, dated October 17, 2016.  The Judge sustained the
objection due to the exhibit’s status as hearsay.  He stated that the letter’s author should have been
presented at the hearing.1  Decision at 2.  
 We examine a Judge’s rulings on admissibility of evidence to see if they are arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02296 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2014). 
Although the Federal Rules of Evidence serve as a guide in DOHA proceedings, the technical rules
of evidence may be relaxed in the interest of a full and complete record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.19.  In
administrative proceedings such as those conducted by DOHA, hearsay is admissible.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 11-12461 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2013).
1Applicant also included a credit report in his post-hearing submission, arguing that the absence of his SOR
debts from the report showed that he had resolved them.  Department Counsel stated that she objected to this argument
on the ground that a debt can fall off a credit report for reasons other than payment.  The Judge sustained this objection
as well.  Decision at 2.  It appears that Department Counsel was not objecting to the admissibility of the report but,
rather, was arguing that it did not demonstrate meaningful debt resolution.  The Judge’s discussion of the credit report
suggests that he admitted the report but found it to be lacking in probative value.    
In the case before us, we conclude that the Judge erred in declining to admit and consider
the letter from the CPA.  It is not unusual in DOHA proceedings for Judges to admit letters and other
such documents, especially when submitted by applicants.  Moreover, under the facts of this case,
the Judge advised Applicant that he could submit after the hearing anything that he believed to be
relevant and probative, which the CPA letter undoubtedly is.  Under the circumstances, we conclude
that Applicant reasonably relied on the Judge’s instructions regarding the sort of information that
he could present post-hearing, a procedure the Judge authorized to compensate for his having denied
Applicant’s motion for a continuance.  Accordingly, it was anomalous for the Judge to have denied
the CPA letter on simply hearsay grounds, insofar as that is the very sort of evidence that a post-
hearing format would likely entail.  We conclude that the Judge erred in denying admission of the
CPA letter.
In light of the above, we remand the case for the Judge to consider the CPA letter and issue
a new decision.  If the case is remanded to a different Judge, he or she should inquire of the parties
whether a new hearing is required or whether the Judge can rely on the transcript of the hearing
contained in the case file.  In light of this holding, the other issues that Applicant has raised are not
ripe for consideration.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
