KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge
regarding the Guideline F security concerns. Rather, it contains a brief statement by the
Applicant that he has made a good-faith effort to correct his financial problems. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02845.a1
DATE: 07/03/2017
DATE: July 3, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02845
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq. , Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 9, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 24, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
The Judge resolved the Guideline G allegations in Applicant’s favor.  Applicant’s appeal
brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge regarding the Guideline F
security concerns.  Rather, it contains a brief statement by the Applicant that he has made a good-
faith effort to correct his financial problems.
We do not review a case de novo.  Our authority to review a case is limited to cases in which
the appealing party has alleged that the Judge committed harmful error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-01734 at 1-2 (App. Bd. Jan 19, 2017).  Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on
the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
