 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04616 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a set of interrogatories. He 
responded to those interrogatories on December 13, 2012.2  On February 9, 2015, the 
DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
                                                          
1 Item 4 (e-QIP, dated August 4, 2012). 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Responses to Interrogatories, dated December 13, 2012.  
 
2 
                                      
 
(December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.3 The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators 
were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 2, 2015. In a sworn statement, dated March 
3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.4 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant 
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) on November 12, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 
30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive as well as the previous Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 16, 2015. Applicant’s response was due on December 
16, 2015. Applicant timely submitted a number of documents on December 3, 2015. The 
case was assigned to me on January 5, 2016. On July 22, 2016, Applicant separated 
from his employer-sponsor, and having lost jurisdiction of the matter by his separation, I 
returned the file to the administrative division without further action in September 2016. 
On October 31, 2016, Applicant obtained new sponsorship, and the case file was 
reassigned to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has held an 
unspecified position with his employer since October 2016. He previously held a number 
of rather short-term positions over the years with various employers. He is a 1974 high 
school graduate. Applicant has never served in the U.S. military. He was granted a 
security clearance in 2003, the level of which is unclear, and was granted a top secret 
clearance with access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) in 2006. The SCI 
                                                          
 
3 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
4 Item 3 (Answer to the SOR, dated March 3, 2015). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
access was terminated in 2012. Applicant was married in February 2006 and divorced in 
March 2012. He has no children.  
 
Financial Considerations5 
It is unclear what Applicant’s finances were like before they became an issue. A 
combination of factors occurred in or before 2012 that apparently resulted in those issues: 
Applicant was divorced in March 2012; the loss of income due to being unemployed from 
January 2012 until May 2012; and, he was employed in Afghanistan from May 2012 until 
September 2012, when he was returned stateside to await the adjudication of his security 
clearance. The most significant factor attributed by him for his financial issues was the 
alleged identity theft by his ex-wife. Applicant contended that she opened various 
accounts in his name, using his Social Security Number without his knowledge or 
authority, and he was unaware that those accounts existed or went unpaid until they were 
already delinquent.  
In early 2012, in an effort to address the financial issues he discovered as a result 
of his divorce, Applicant engaged the professional services of an attorney specializing in 
consumer fraud. Pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1666,6 that attorney sent letters to various 
                                                          
5 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 3, supra note 4; Item 4, supra note 1; Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, 
dated August 23, 2012; Item 6, supra note 2; Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated April 5, 2014); Item 8 (Equifax Credit 
Report, dated July 7, 2015); and Experian Credit Report, dated November 16, 2015, attached to Applicant’s Response 
to the FORM. 
6 §1666. Correction of billing errors 
(a) Written notice by obligor to creditor; time for and contents of notice; procedure upon 
receipt of notice by creditor 
If a creditor, within sixty days after having transmitted to an obligor a statement of the obligor's 
account in connection with an extension of consumer credit, receives at the address disclosed under 
section 1637(b)(10) of this title a written notice (other than notice on a payment stub or other payment 
medium supplied by the creditor if the creditor so stipulates with the disclosure required under section 
1637(a)(7) of this title) from the obligor in which the obligor— 
 
(1) sets forth or otherwise enables the creditor to identify the name and account 
number (if any) of the obligor, (2) indicates the obligor's belief that the statement 
contains a billing error and the amount of such billing error, and (3) sets forth the 
reasons for the obligor's belief (to the extent applicable) that the statement contains 
a billing error, 
 
the creditor shall, unless the obligor has, after giving such written notice and before the expiration of 
the time limits herein specified, agreed that the statement was correct— 
 
(A) not later than thirty days after the receipt of the notice, send a written 
acknowledgment thereof to the obligor, unless the action required in subparagraph 
(B) is taken within such thirty-day period, and (B) not later than two complete billing 
cycles of the creditor (in no event later than ninety days) after the receipt of the 
notice and prior to taking any action to collect the amount, or any part thereof, 
indicated by the obligor under paragraph (2) either— 
 
(i) make appropriate corrections in the account of the obligor, 
including the crediting of any finance charges on amounts 
erroneously billed, and transmit to the obligor a notification of 
such corrections and the creditor's explanation of any change in 
the amount indicated by the obligor under paragraph (2) and, if 
 
4 
                                      
 
creditors requesting all records, including applications, signature cards, recorded 
conversations, and all information that the creditor(s) may have verifying that Applicant 
had applied for an extension of credit with the creditor(s). In late 2013, he also engaged 
the professional services of another law firm specializing in credit improvement and 
rehabilitation. That firm sent dispute letters to various creditors challenging the accuracy 
of reports to credit reporting agencies. The combined efforts by the two firms were ignored 
by some of the creditors, but others furnished responses. 
The SOR identified five purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection or charged off, as generally reflected by his August 2012 credit report, his April 
2014 credit report, or his July 2015 credit report. Those debts, totaling approximately 
$38,389, their current status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by 
the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described 
below. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a bank-issued department store credit card individual account 
in Applicant’s name with a $10,800 credit limit and unpaid balance of $21,611 that was 
placed for collection and charged-off.7 Applicant denied that he had ever had a credit card 
with that particular creditor. On April 5, 2012, his initial attorney requested documentation 
regarding the account, but the creditor never responded to the request. The account was 
transferred or sold to at least two debt purchasers. A dispute was filed with the credit 
reporting agencies, and a request for information was subsequently made to the most 
recent holder of the account. Finally, in August 2014, that holder of the account responded 
to Applicant’s inquiry and dispute. Based on the research of that company, the account 
was closed and the company directed the credit reporting agencies to delete the account.8 
                                                          
any such change is made and the obligor so requests, copies of 
documentary evidence of the obligor's indebtedness; or (ii) send 
a written explanation or clarification to the obligor, after having 
conducted an investigation, setting forth to the extent applicable 
the reasons why the creditor believes the account of the obligor 
was correctly shown in the statement and, upon request of the 
obligor, provide copies of documentary evidence of the obligor's 
indebtedness. In the case of a billing error where the obligor 
alleges that the creditor's billing statement reflects goods not 
delivered to the obligor or his designee in accordance with the 
agreement made at the time of the transaction, a creditor may 
not construe such amount to be correctly shown unless he 
determines that such goods were actually delivered, mailed, or 
otherwise sent to the obligor and provides the obligor with a 
statement of such determination. 
 
After complying with the provisions of this subsection with respect to an alleged billing error, a creditor 
has no further responsibility under this section if the obligor continues to make substantially the same 
allegation with respect to such error. 
 
7 Item 5, supra note 4, at 9; Item 7, supra note 4, at 5. 
 
8 Letter, dated April 5, 2012, attached to Item 3; E-mail, dated February 1, 2014, attached to Item 3. Addiing 
some confusion to the issue, there is another letter from the most recent holder of the account, dated February 16, 
2012, attached to Item 6, stating that the account was to be deleted from Applicant’s credit reports. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
The account is not listed in Applicant’s July 2015 credit report or the November 2015 
credit report. The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is an unspecified type of bank-issued joint account with a high 
credit of $8,133 and unpaid balance of $7,935 that was placed for collection and charged-
off (in January 2010).9 Applicant denied that he had ever had an account with that 
particular creditor. On April 5, 2012, his initial attorney requested documentation 
regarding the account, but the creditor never responded to the request. A dispute was 
filed with the credit reporting agencies. Applicant’s attorney advised him in January 2014 
that a response would be due after approximately 60 days from the dispute. Neither action 
resulted in a response.10 Applicant’s November 2015 credit report does not mention that 
a dispute had been submitted, and it continued to report that the account was still 
unresolved as a potentially negative account. While there is evidence of attempts having 
been made to dispute the account, there is no evidence that the account has been 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a bank credit card individual account in Applicant’s name with 
a $4,000 credit limit and an unpaid balance of $5,331 that was placed for collection and 
charged off in June 2009.11 Applicant denied that he had ever had a credit card account 
with that particular bank. On April 5, 2012, his initial attorney requested documentation 
regarding the account, but the creditor never responded to the request. A dispute was 
filed with the credit reporting agencies. Applicant’s attorney advised him in March 2014 
that a response would be due after approximately 60 days from the dispute. Neither action 
resulted in a response.12 The account is not listed in Applicant’s July 2015 credit report 
or the November 2015 credit report. Thus, it appears that he account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a bank-issued individual charge account for a woman’s 
clothing store with a $1,930 credit limit and an unpaid balance of $2,194 that was placed 
for collection and charged off in September 2012.13 Applicant denied that he had ever 
had an account with that particular creditor. On April 5, 2012, his initial attorney requested 
documentation regarding the account, but the creditor never responded to the request. A 
dispute was filed with the credit reporting agencies. Applicant’s attorney advised him in 
January 2014 that a response would be due after approximately 60 days from the dispute. 
Neither action resulted in a response.14 The account is not listed in Applicant’s July 2015 
                                                          
9 Item 5, supra note 4, at 6, 12; Item 7, supra note 4, at 5. 
 
10 Letter, dated April 5, 2012, attached to Item 3; E-mail, dated February 1, 2014Letter, dated August 8, 2014, 
attached to Item 3. 
 
11 Item 5, supra note 4, at 5; Item 7, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
12 Letter, dated April 5, 2012, attached to Item 3; E-mail, dated March 15, 2014, attached to Item 3. 
 
13 Item 7, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
14 Letter, dated April 5, 2012, attached to Item 3; E-mail, dated February 1, 2014, attached to Item 3. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
credit report or the November 2015 credit report. Thus, it appears that the account has 
been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): This is a bank-issued individual charge account for a department 
store with a past-due and unpaid balance of $1,318 that was placed for collection and 
charged off.15 Applicant denied that he had ever had an account with that particular 
creditor. On April 5, 2012, his initial attorney requested documentation regarding the 
account, but the creditor never responded to the request. A dispute was filed with the 
credit reporting agencies. Applicant’s attorney advised him in January 2014 that a 
response would be due after approximately 60 days from the dispute. Neither action 
resulted in a response.16  Applicant’s July 2015 credit report refers to a consumer dispute, 
but no decision was reflected. The account is not listed in his November 2015 credit 
report. It appears that the account has been resolved. 
In addition to the accounts alleged in the SOR, Applicant discovered a number of 
other accounts that had been opened in his name without his knowledge or authorization. 
He disputed one bank-issued credit card in early 2012, and after an investigation, the 
bank determined that Applicant was not responsible for the “fraudulent transactions” 
associated with the card.17 Any reference to the account was removed from his credit 
reports. Applicant’s ex-wife also attempted to open an Internet account with a bank in July 
2005 – using Applicant’s name – but at that time, she had not yet married Applicant. On 
the application, she entered a false employment location as well as a false monthly salary 
(claiming she earned $43,000 per month). Applicant’s attorney successfully disputed the 
account with the creditor in April 2012.18  
On December 11, 2012, Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement to 
reflect his net monthly income; monthly expenses; and any monthly remainder that might 
be available for discretionary spending or savings. Although the figures furnished are now 
out of date, they reflect a monthly net income of $2,493.94; monthly expenses of $1,200; 
debt payments of $1,000; and a monthly remainder of $293.94. He also had a retirement 
plan worth $70,000.19 There was no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of any 
financial counseling. Nevertheless, Applicant is dedicated to resolving his few remaining 
financial issues associated with his identity theft. Because the majority of his accounts in 
his most recent credit report are listed as current, and he has taken positive steps to 
resolve a variety of accounts that were not listed in the SOR as well as those that were 
so listed, it appears that Applicant’s finances are under control, especially since he now 
has a new position, and his attorneys have pursued the identity theft issues. 
                                                          
15 Item 5, supra note 4, at 6; Item 7, supra note 4, at 6; Item 8, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
16 Letter, dated April 5, 2012, attached to Item 3; E-mail, dated February 1, 2014, attached to Item 3. 
 
17 Letter, dated May 10, 2012, attached to Item 6. 
 
18 AppIication, dated July 28, 2005, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; Letter, dated April 23, 2012, 
attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
19 Personal Financial Statement, dated December 11, 2012, attached to Item 6. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”20 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”21   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”22 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.23  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
20 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
21 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
22 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
23 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”24  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”25 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) may 
apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
                                                          
24 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
25 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. Applicant’s credit reports reflect a number of delinquent accounts. As noted by 
Department Counsel, the Government is entitled to rely on credit reports in these 
proceedings as ordinary business record exceptions to the hearsay rule. There was no 
evidence submitted “to establish that those documents were improperly or irregularly 
produced, or produced in circumstances that would render their reliability suspect.”26 
Applicant’s stand on principle led him to refuse, for a relatively lengthy period, to pay off 
those accounts which he felt were not his. ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”27 In addition, ¶ 20(e) 
may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. As noted 
above, a combination of factors occurred in or before 2012 that apparently resulted in 
Applicant’s financial issues. He was divorced in March 2012; he lost income due to being 
unemployed from January 2012 until May 2012; and, although he was employed in 
Afghanistan from May 2012 until September 2012, he was returned stateside to await the 
                                                          
26 ISCR Case No. 07-08925 at 3 (App. Bd. September 15, 2008). 
 
27 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
adjudication of his security clearance. However, the most significant factor attributed by 
him for his financial issues was the alleged actions by his ex-wife. Applicant contended, 
and he has proven in several instances, that, even before they were actually married, she 
opened various accounts in his name, using his Social Security Number without his 
knowledge or authority, and he was unaware that those accounts existed or went unpaid 
until they were already delinquent. Applicant was the innocent victim of identity theft. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
since about 2012 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” However, the series of events that resulted in his financial problems 
commenced under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur for they started before 
he was married and ended with his divorce. The lingering effects of his ex-wife’s actions 
are still being felt in light of the slow actions and inaction by some of his creditors and the 
credit reporting agencies in complying with the law. 15 U.S.C. § 1681c-2 requires timely 
actions related to complaints involving identity theft.28 Applicant’s attorneys notified both 
                                                          
28 § 1681c–2 - Block of information resulting from identity theft 
 
(a) Block  
Except as otherwise provided in this section, a consumer reporting agency shall block the reporting 
of any information in the file of a consumer that the consumer identifies as information that resulted 
from an alleged identity theft, not later than 4 business days after the date of receipt by such agency 
of—  
 
(1) appropriate proof of the identity of the consumer; (2) a copy of an identity theft 
report; (3) the identification of such information by the consumer; and (4) a 
statement by the consumer that the information is not information relating to any 
transaction by the consumer.  
 
(b) Notification  
A consumer reporting agency shall promptly notify the furnisher of information identified by the 
consumer under subsection (a) of this section—  
 
(1) that the information may be a result of identity theft; (2) that an identity theft 
report has been filed; (3) that a block has been requested under this section; and 
(4) of the effective dates of the block. 
  
(c) Authority to decline or rescind 
  
(1) In general  
A consumer reporting agency may decline to block, or may rescind any block, of information relating 
to a consumer under this section, if the consumer reporting agency reasonably determines that— 
  
(A) the information was blocked in error or a block was requested by the consumer 
in error; (B) the information was blocked, or a block was requested by the 
consumer, on the basis of a material misrepresentation of fact by the consumer 
relevant to the request to block; or (C) the consumer obtained possession of 
goods, services, or money as a result of the blocked transaction or transactions.  
 
(2) Notification to consumer  
If a block of information is declined or rescinded under this subsection, the affected consumer shall 
be notified promptly, in the same manner as consumers are notified of the reinsertion of information 
under section 1681i (a)(5)(B) of this title.  
 
(3) Significance of block  
For purposes of this subsection, if a consumer reporting agency rescinds a block, the presence of 
information in the file of a consumer prior to the blocking of such information is not evidence of 
 
11 
                                      
 
the creditors and the credit reporting agencies of the identity theft, but while several of 
those entities performed due diligence in investigating the allegations and closing out and 
blocking the account information, several of them failed to do so. The identity theft, the 
divorce, and the unemployment were factors beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant’s 
limited ability to extract documentation from creditors and credit reporting agencies, or to 
motivate them to comply with the law, are also beyond his control. The evidence clearly 
establishes that there was identity theft regarding several accounts, and Applicant 
furnished documentation from his attorneys and some creditors and credit reporting 
agencies to confirm those facts. His inability to present documentation to support his 
contentions regarding all of the disputed accounts is not to be construed as a failure or 
refusal to do so. Applicant initiated and continues to adhere to a good-faith effort to 
resolve the overdue accounts that were alleged to be his responsibility. He addressed 
several accounts that were not listed in the SOR and also those that were so listed. 
                                                          
whether the consumer knew or should have known that the consumer obtained possession of any 
goods, services, or money as a result of the block.  
 
(d) Exception for resellers  
 
(1) No reseller file  
This section shall not apply to a consumer reporting agency, if the consumer reporting agency—  
 
(A) is a reseller; (B) is not, at the time of the request of the consumer under 
subsection (a) of this section, otherwise furnishing or reselling a consumer report 
concerning the information identified by the consumer; and (C) informs the 
consumer, by any means, that the consumer may report the identity theft to the 
Bureau to obtain consumer information regarding identity theft.  
 
(2) Reseller with file  
The sole obligation of the consumer reporting agency under this section, with regard to any request 
of a consumer under this section, shall be to block the consumer report maintained by the consumer 
reporting agency from any subsequent use, if—  
 
(A) the consumer, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this 
section, identifies, to a consumer reporting agency, information in the file of the 
consumer that resulted from identity theft; and (B) the consumer reporting agency 
is a reseller of the identified information.  
 
(3) Notice  
In carrying out its obligation under paragraph (2), the reseller shall promptly provide a notice to the 
consumer of the decision to block the file. Such notice shall contain the name, address, and 
telephone number of each consumer reporting agency from which the consumer information was 
obtained for resale.  
 
(e) Exception for verification companies  
The provisions of this section do not apply to a check services company, acting as such, which issues 
authorizations for the purpose of approving or processing negotiable instruments, electronic fund 
transfers, or similar methods of payments, except that, beginning 4 business days after receipt of 
information described in paragraphs (1) through (3) of subsection (a) of this section, a check services 
company shall not report to a national consumer reporting agency described in section 1681a (p) of 
this title, any information identified in the subject identity theft report as resulting from identity theft.  
 
(f) Access to blocked information by law enforcement agencies  
No provision of this section shall be construed as requiring a consumer reporting agency to prevent 
a Federal, State, or local law enforcement agency from accessing blocked information in a consumer 
file to which the agency could otherwise obtain access under this subchapter.  
 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Despite his periodic unemployment, Applicant’s efforts resulted in the successful 
resolution of a number of accounts.  
 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.  
 
While there is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling, and it remains unclear if he currently has funds remaining at the end of each 
month for discretionary use or savings, there is evidence to reflect that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. His most recent credit report reflects the vast 
majority of his accounts are current, and his more recent resolution of accounts improved 
his current financial record. Under the circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly by 
addressing his delinquent accounts and by initiating efforts to work with his alleged 
creditors.29 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.30 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
29 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
30 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.31   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. A number of 
accounts in Applicant’s name became delinquent, and others to be charged off. He 
submitted no financial information to indicate his current financial status, and he failed to 
submit some documentation regarding some of his SOR-related accounts.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or 
mishandling protected information. He candidly acknowledged having some financial 
difficulties as the victim of identity theft with several creditors when he completed his e-
QIP. A series of events that resulted in his financial problems commenced under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur for they started before he was married and ended 
with his divorce. The lingering effects of his ex-wife’s actions are still being felt in light of 
the slow actions and inaction by some of his creditors and the credit reporting agencies in 
complying with the law. Applicant hired two law firms to assist him in fighting the results 
of his identity theft. Their combined efforts resolved a number of non-SOR accounts as 
well as most of those alleged in the SOR. Only one such account remains unresolved.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:32 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
                                                          
31 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
32 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a positive track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, aggressively addressing the debts in his name, and promising to take 
additional corrective actions. His efforts were hindered by his employment situation and 
the failure of some creditors and credit reporting agencies to comply with 15 U.S.C §§ 
1666 and 1681c-2. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
