                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-06983           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On December 30, 2015, Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 15, 2015, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on December 14, 2016, and scheduled for hearing on March 8,
2017. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on March 20, 2017.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented individual payment
plans with his listed SOR creditors.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14
days to supplement the record, Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant furnished an outline of proposed payment plans with
creditors 1.b, 1.f, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.q. Applicant’s submission did not include any repayment
plans or good-faith payments to any of his listed creditors. His submission was admitted
without objections as AE C.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to timely file his federal and state
income tax returns for tax years 2006-2012 and (b) incurred delinquent debts exceeding
$20,000 (including $14,000 in in student loan debts); and (c) filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy relief in June 2004 (discharged in October 2005). Under Guideline E, the
allegations covering SOR allegation ¶ 1.a were incorporated by reference.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations with
explanations.  He claimed he filed his back tax returns for tax years 2006-2012 and took
care of any amounts owing. He claimed that most of the covered debts were attributable
to unemployment and medical issues. Further, he claimed he paid off all of the debts
included in his June 2004 Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. Applicant denied the
allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.c, claiming he has disputed this debt with the creditor for
years.
     
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old information technology (IT) support technician for a
defense contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR
1
      Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated
December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial
or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were
established to supercede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures
for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DoD 5220.6, subject to
the updated substantive changes in the guidelines, effective June 8, 2017.
2
and admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material
findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first spouse in July 1991 and divorced her in October 1997.
(GEs 1-2) He has two adult children from this marriage. He remarried in September 1996
and has three stepchildren from this marriage. (GEs 1, 5; Tr. 46) Applicant separated
from his current spouse in April 2012 and lived apart for a number of years. (GEs 1- 2; Tr. 
33) He has since reconciled with his current spouse in June 2016. (Tr. 33-34 ) While living
apart from his current spouse, he fathered a child with another woman. (Tr. 45) Since
reconciling with his wife, he disclosed his extramarital relationship with the other woman
and his fathering of a child with this woman. (GE 2)
Between July 2009 and May 2013, Applicant attended classes at a local
community college, but earned no degree or diploma. (GEs 1-2) He enlisted in the Army
in July 1989 and served two years in the Inactive Reserve. (GE 1) Applicant  received a
general discharge in March 1991 for a pattern of misconduct. (Tr. 32)
Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2014. (GEs 1-2)
Between October 2005 and August 2013, he worked for another defense contractor as an
IT specialist. (GE 1)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant brings to these proceedings a considerable history of recurrent difficulties 
in managing his finances. Burdened with heavy credit card and student loan debts, he
petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in June 2004. (GEs 1-5; Tr. 45) Upon
satisfying the terms of his approved Chapter 13 plan, he received his discharge in
October 2005. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 31) 
Applicant failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years
2006-2012. (GE 2; Tr. 26, 41) With the help of his current spouse, he assured he filed his
2006-2012 tax returns in April 2013. (GEs 1, 5; Tr. 27-28, 34-35) His wife completed IRS-
approved advanced exams in 2013, 2014, and 2015, and based on her IRS training, she
appears to have been qualified to assist Applicant in his tax preparations. (AEs A-B)
Applicant attributed his tax-filing failures to procrastination, immaturity, and money owed
the IRS. (GE 2; Tr. 35-36) Applicant’s filing assurances are not accompanied by any
documentation and leave questions as to whether (a) the returns were filed voluntarily; (b)
federal and state taxes were due; and (c) any payment guidelines imposed by the IRS
and his state taxing authority were complied with. Without proper documentation (either at
hearing or post-hearing), these questions cannot be answered with any degree of
accuracy and reliability. 
Afforded a post-hearing opportunity to document his filing of his federal and state
tax returns for tax years 2006-2012 and any related filing and payment compliance
3
directives from the IRS, Applicant provided no records of his voluntarily filing any of his
federal and state tax returns for tax years 2006-2012. He provided insufficient clarity
either as to whether he or the IRS filed the returns for these tax years. (GEs 2-5)
Between 2009 and 2013, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts.
(GEs 2 and 5) His listed debts (16 in all) exceeded $20,000. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 37-38) One of
the debts (SOR debt ¶ 1.c for $1,655) Applicant denied without any explanations. For
those remaining debts that he admitted, he attributed them to a combination of
unemployment, monthly child support payments, and the lack of financial means to
service his debts. (GE 2; Tr. 37-38) Several of the listed debts student loan debts (SOR
debts ¶¶ 1.m-1.o) exceeding $14,000 that he has not been able to return to current or
rehabilitation status. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 37-38) Applicant incurred these debts while attending
college classes between July 2009 and February 2011. (GEs 3 and 5) Credit reports
document that these defaulted loans were assigned to collection in February 2011. (GE 3)
Applicant listed some of his remaining debts he has looked into and claimed to
have entered into payment plans with a number of the listed creditors. (AE C) Cited
creditors he claims to have approved individual payment plans with are comprised of the
following: creditors 1.b, 1.f-1.i, 1.k, and 1.q. However, Applicant provided no
documentation of approved payment plans with any of these creditors. Without more
probative evidence of approved payment plans and good-faith payments, Applicant
cannot be credited with either payment plans or payments.
Applicant’s remaining creditors not covered in his table of creditors with approved
payment plans have not been addressed. SOR debt ¶ 1.c that Applicant disputes is not
addressed with documented dispute corroboration (such as letters to the creditor and
credit reporting agencies) and cannot be credited as a well-supported dispute. (GEs 2-5) 
Endorsements 
Applicant is well regarded by his program manager who vouched for Applicant’s
trustworthiness. (Tr. 49-50) It is unclear whether his program manager has any knowledge
of the financial issues covered in this proceeding. 
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
           The new AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well
as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on
the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
4
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means satisfy debts and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. . . An individual who is
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . .   AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
5
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of failing to file federal and
state tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2012, and his accumulating delinquent
consumer and student loan debts exceeding $20,000. Applicant’s tax-filing lapses and
incurred delinquent consumer and student loan debts warrant the application of four of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” DC
¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so,” DC ¶ 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations,” and DC ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently
filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal,
state, or local income tax as required.”
Because the allegations covered by Guideline F are incorporated in Guideline E,
pertinent disqualifying conditions under Guideline E must be considered as well.
Applicable disqualifying conditions consist of the following: DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of
dishonesty or rule violations.” Applicant’s recurrent failure to timely file his federal and
state tax returns over a seven-year period (2006-2012 tax years) reflect a pattern of rule
violations that are disqualifying. 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
6
Applicant’s multiple failures to file his federal and state tax returns for tax periods
2006-2012 and accumulation of delinquent consumer and student loan debts without (a)
good corroborative evidence of his filing his back tax returns as claimed and (b)
addressing his delinquent debts, merit no application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant provided no probative
evidence of financial hardships that would justify (a)  his failing to  timely file his federal
and state tax returns for the seven years in issue, or (b) his failing to address his SOR
consumer and student loan debts in a responsible way.
To date, Applicant has not documented his voluntarily filing any of his federal and
state tax returns for tax years 2006-2012 that he claimed to have filed in April 2013. 
Nor has he provided evidence of his being in compliance with IRS filing and payment
arrangement criteria in any verifiable ways. Further, he has not provided any
documentary proof of his addressing his listed consumer and student loan debts. 
Because Applicant has not developed any verifiable evidence of his addressing
his back federal and state tax returns for the years in issue, or addressed his delinquent
consumer and student loan debts, application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and
is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”
and  MC ¶ 20(g), “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,”
are not available to Applicant. Prospects for his obtaining the necessary filing and
payment documentation in the foreseeable future are uncertain and difficult to gauge.
Likewise, potential mitigating conditions covered by Guideline E are not available to
Applicant.
The timing of filing of federal and state tax returns in DOHA proceedings is
critical to an assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good
judgment in following rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to
classified information. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016);
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s tax-filing lapses
and insufficient debt repayment actions with the resources available to him prevent him
from meeting the Appeal Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability.
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4
n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25,
2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s limited attention devoted to
addressing his 2006-2012 federal and state tax returns and delinquent consumer and
student loan debts over an extended number of years reflect poorly on his judgment and
willingness to follow IRS and state rules and regulations.
7
The favorable impressions Applicant has forged with his program manager are
notable and worthy of praise and encouragement. They are not enough at this time,
however, to overcome security concerns associated with his history of failing to file his
federal and state tax returns for the years in issue (i.e., 2006-2012), or establish a
meaningful track record of paying his listed consumer and student loan debts. See
ISCR case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)(internal citations omitted).
More time is needed for Applicant to demonstrate his reliability and trustworthiness in
meeting IRS and state laws and regulations governing tax filings and payments of his
accrued consumer and student loan debts.  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s tax filing and
payment delinquencies on his consumer and student loan debts, his actions to date in
addressing his finances are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the
guideline governing his finances. No different conclusions would result under the AGs in
place prior to June 8, 2017. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a-1.r of Guideline F and incorporated
subparagraph 1.a of Guideline E.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.r:                       Against Applicant 
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT)               AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:                        Against Applicant
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
10
