 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04863 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 7, 2015, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2017, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on February 22, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
exhibit list was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE I). Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he denied the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of all the pleadings and evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is married for the second time and has four 
children. He currently works in the private sector in a position not requiring a security 
clearance. He is seeking a clearance for a position with a government contractor. From 
August 2003 to December 2012, he worked for two different contractors as a security 
clearance investigator. He has a bachelor’s degree.2   
 
 The allegations raised in the SOR include: (1) Applicant was removed from a 
contract a government agency had with his employer in December 2012, as a result of a 
quality control investigation (See SOR ¶ 1.a); and (2) Applicant resigned from his 
government contractor job in March 2012, while undergoing an integrity investigation. 
He is not eligible for rehire. (See SOR ¶ 1.b)  
  
 From August 2003 to March 2012, Applicant worked for a government contractor 
(Contractor A) as an investigator. His job was to perform background investigations on 
people seeking security clearances or trustworthiness determinations. In 2005, he was 
promoted to a senior investigator position. He claimed that he was given the complex 
cases and that he was chosen to train other investigators. In his 2011 job performance 
appraisal, he was counseled for not meeting quality goals for the year. He received an 
overall rating of 2.0 (partially meets performance expectations). When he left his 
position in March 2012, he claimed it was to seek a better opportunity and because he 
felt that the deadlines established by Contractor A were unreasonable. He was hired by 
another government contractor (Contractor B) to conduct background investigations. He 
took a $5,000 pay cut to take this position. He remained with Contractor B until 
December 2012 when he was fired.3 
 
 In February 2012, Applicant’s employer (Contractor A) conducted a random audit 
of his case files. The audit revealed that the files contained inconsistencies in 
Applicant’s reporting as compared to his case notes. Because of what the audit 
                                                          
2 Tr. 6, 30; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 30-32, 57, 71, 73; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
revealed, Contractor A initiated a three-case sampling of Applicant’s work product. 
Before the review was completed, Applicant resigned his position. He claims he was 
unaware of the investigation at the time of his resignation. The record does not contain 
evidence that he was formally notified about the investigation before he resigned.4 
 
 Contractor A concluded its review in April 2012. Of 19 total items reworked, 15 
were validated, but 4 were “undetermined.” Several minor discrepancies were noted, 
but nothing was found that affected the adjudication of the cases. Contractor A’s 
findings were sent to the responsible government agency under the contract. That 
agency was aware Applicant began work for Contractor B in April 2012 doing similar 
type work. The agency closed the case with Contractor A, but initiated a three-case 
review of Applicant’s work under Contractor B’s employment in July 2012. In August 
2012, those results revealed that out of 30 cases, 27 were validated and three were 
“undetermined.” No integrity concerns were found, but quality concerns were noted, 
such as, discrepant information between the rework investigation and Applicant’s case 
notes or report of investigation (ROI); notes that did not support the ROI; sources not 
given an opportunity to meet Applicant in person; instances of information obtained, but 
not reported; five instances of missing case notes; and other minor quality concerns. 
Contactor B proposed to the government agency that it would discuss the results with 
Applicant, which it did in August 2012. The investigation was reopened in November 
2012, for a three-case follow-up. In two cases Applicant reported that he received 
physical records from interviewees when they reported to the follow-up investigator that 
they did not provide Applicant with the described records. Because of these continuing 
problems, Applicant was removed from the contract by the government agency in 
December 2012. Shortly thereafter, he was terminated by Contractor B. An additional 
audit of cases was conducted after Applicant’s termination covering the period of 
November 19 to December 19, 2012. Thirty cases were reworked by new investigators. 
Numerous problems and concerns were discovered including integrity issues, 
interviewing the wrong person, claiming he received physical records when he did not, 
employment record information misrepresented, unreported subject contacts, notes not 
supported by the ROI, and numerous professionalism concerns.5 
  
 Applicant testified that any discrepancies in his reports were unintentional. He 
denied taking short cuts in his investigations to complete the process in a timely 
manner. He stated he believed an investigator for Contractor B was biased against him 
for personal reasons. He also stated that he was part of a successful class action 
lawsuit against Contractor A based upon unsuitable working conditions and believed 
that could be a motive behind the company’s investigation of him. I did not find 
Applicant’s testimony credible and the record does not support bad faith by either 
Contractor A or B concerning each’s investigation into Applicant on this matter.6 
                                                          
4 GE 2 (p. 1 of 338, p. 23 of 338). 
 
5 GE 2 (p. 16 of 338, pp 23-28 of 338, pp. 82-86 of 338, p. 87 of 338). 
 
6 Tr. 33-34, 53, 69, 88-89, 96-97, 100; AE B-D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant produced two summary interviews from former supervisors who worked 
with him at either Contractor A or B. Both persons recommended Applicant for a 
security clearance.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
7 AE E. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
Applicant worked for two contractors where he performed similar investigative 
duties. His work was reviewed in both settings and the results showed a lack of integrity 
and quality problems with his investigations. His work was deemed so deficient that the 
controlling government agency had him removed from working on the contract with 
 
6 
 
 
contractor B. Although he was investigated by Contractor A, there was no record 
evidence showing that he was ineligible for rehire. I did not find Applicant’s explanations 
for his actions credible. AG ¶ 16(d) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances of the two investigations into 
Applicant’s work product as a security clearance investigator. Several series of 
problems were discovered concerning his work. Some of those problems involved 
integrity issues. The problems were not limited in time or scope and covered a 
significant period of time. He was ultimately terminated from a contract because of his 
deficient investigations. For a security clearance investigator, his actions did not 
constitute a minor offense. His deficient investigations create doubt about his overall 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment as an investigator, and ultimately on his 
worthiness to hold a security clearance. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s years of 
contractor service. However, I also considered that he conducted deficient security 
 
7 
 
 
clearance investigations that ultimately had him removed from performing duties under 
the contract and fired. Some of the deficiencies involved integrity issues. Applicant 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
