                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
------------------------------------ )          ADP Case No. 15-01081   
                           )                                                          
                                                          )
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Aubrey DeAngelis, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate trustworthiness concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility to hold a public
trust position is denied.   
 
History of the Case
On October 7, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of whether to
grant eligibility for a public trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative
judge to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865
(Exec. Or. 10865), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs).  These new Guidelines replaced the 2006 AGs placed in1
force on September 6, 2006, and are controlling for decisions issued on or after June 8,
2017.  2
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 14, 2016,  and requested a hearing.
This case was assigned to me on February 9, 2017. The case was scheduled for
hearing on April 5, 2017. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s application for eligibility to hold a public trust
position. At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-6);
Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and no exhibits. The transcript was received
on April 13, 2017. 
Procedural Issues
Before the closing of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of a debt
consolidation plan, character references, payment of her SOR debt ¶ 1.d, and
satisfaction of a non-SOR debt. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days
to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant provided a character reference, but furnished no
documentation of covering her individual debts. Applicant’s submission was admitted
without objection as AE A.   
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 12 delinquent debts
exceeding $17,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but SOR debt ¶ 1.l with
explanations. She claimed she will address each of her admitted debts, either
individually or through a debt consolidation plan.
1  A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security,
titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the
Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed DOHA to continue to utilize DOD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations for persons holding sensitive
positions (to include those involving ADP I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) 
           2  Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated
December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial
or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were
established to supercede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures
for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DoD 5220.6, subject to
the updated substantive changes in the guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. The new AGs are available at
http://.ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220.6 R20170608.pdf
2
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 53-year-old analyst for a defense medical health contractor who
seeks eligibility to hold a public trust position. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in July 1989 and has two children from this marriage, ages 17
and 24. (GE 1; Tr. 22) She earned an Associate’s degree in June 2000 and a
Bachelor’s degree in business administration in September 2016. (GE 1; Tr. 22-23)
Applicant enlisted in her previous state’s Army National Guard in June 1981 and served
over 11 years of active duty. She re-enlisted in her current state’s Army National Guard
in July 1992 and served over 14 years of active duty in her Guard unit before receiving
an honorable discharge in November 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 22-23) 
Since March 2014, Applicant has been employed on a full-time basis for her
current employer. (GE 1) Between 2006 and 2008, Applicant served as a military
civilian. (GE 1; Tr. 23-24). From 2008 to 2010, she was a “stay-at-home mom.” (Tr. 24)
Between July 2010 and March 2014, she worked for a retail organization as a sales
associate. (GE 1; Tr. 24-25) She held security clearances during her military
enlistments. (GE 1 and AE A)
Finances
Applicant has a considerable history of problems with her finances. Between
2010 and 2016, she accumulated 12 delinquent consumer debts exceeding $17,000.
(GEs 2-6) She attributed her debts to insufficient income necessary to support her two
daughters. (Tr. 26)
To date, Applicant has not addressed any of her debts covered by SOR debts ¶¶
1.a ($315); 1.b ($132); 1.c ($2,266); 1.e ($4,150); 1.f ($302); 1.g ($106); 1.h ($706); 1.i
($1,178); 1.j ($5,534); 1.k ($2,284); and 1.l ($124). (Tr. 32-43) While she claimed to
have paid SOR debt ¶ 1.g, she furnished no payment documentation. (Tr. 34-35)
Applicant pursued debt consolidation initiatives with a debt consolidation firm in
February 2017, but never furnished the firm any list of debts to be consolidated, and
never finalized a debt consolidation agreement (Tr. 36-37) Further, Applicant’s claims of
payments to non-SOR creditors are not supported by corroborating evidence. (Tr. 41-
42) And finally, Applicant provided no documentation of payment arrangements she
committed to making with some of her SOR creditors in the Electronic Questionnaires
for Electronic Processing (e-QIP) she completed in March 2014. (GE 1; Tr. 42-43)
As a civilian in her Army National Guard unit, between September 2006 and
September 2008, she grossed $2,500 a month. (Tr. 27) Since 2006, she has
supplemented her Army civilian income with her military pension of $2,375 a month. (Tr.
29) She currently nets $2,100 a month from her present employer. (Tr. 28-29) While
3
working for her non-DOD retail employer, she grossed between $1,100 and $1,200 a
month. (Tr. 28) She estimates her husband’s monthly gross income to be $2,100. (Tr.
30)
Character References
Colleagues who served in the military with Applicant credited her with being
trustworthy, hardworking, and a great asset to any company she works for. (AE A)  Her
supervising non-commissioned officer (NCO) in her National Guard unit noted her past
military NCO status and attested to her attentiveness, fortitude, and professionalism.
(AE A) He credited her with admirable qualities of honesty, loyalty, polished manners, a
keen sense of humor, and a great personality. (AE A) He characterized Applicant as an
NCO who consistently exhibited the highest degree of integrity, loyalty, and motivation.  
Policies
The new AGs in SEAD 4 for use in contractor cases covered by the process
provided by DOD 5220.6 list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well
as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect sensitive information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying, if any, and many of the conditions that
could mitigate trustworthiness concerns.
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied.The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(a). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant AGs are to be considered
together with whole-person factors. The following AG ¶ 2(d) factors are to be considered
along with the guidelines: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of
the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
4
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. . . An individual who is
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . .   AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. 
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect
sensitive information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all [trustworthiness]
determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
5
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility. “[T]rustworthiness]
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts over an extended number of years. For reasons not fully explained
by Applicant, these debts remain outstanding. 
 Holding a public trust position involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor in
protecting and guarding personally identifiable information (PII). DOD Manual
5200.02, which incorporated and canceled DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, covers both
critical-sensitive and non-critical sensitive national security positions for civilian
personnel. See 5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3. Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II
were previously classified as “sensitive positions.” under DOD Regulation 5200.2-R,
Personnel Security Program, ¶¶ C3.1.2. 1.1.7, C3. 12.2.2, and C3. 1.2.3 (Jan. 1987,
as amended) (the Regulation) are now covered by 5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3.
Definitions for critical-sensitive and non-critical sensitive positions provided in
5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3 utilize work descriptions similar to those used to define ADP
positions under DOD Regulation (32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J) ADP
positions are broken down as follows in 32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J):
ADP-I (critical-sensitive positions covering the direction, design, and planning of
computer systems) and ADP II (non-critical-sensitive positions covering the design,
operation, and maintenance of computer systems).  Considered together, the ADP I
and II  positions covered in  32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J define and
explain the same critical-sensitive and non-critical-sensitive positions covered in
5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3 and are reconcilable as included positions in 5200.02.
So, while ADP trustworthy positions are not expressly identified in DOD Manual
5200.02, they are implicitly covered as non-critical sensitive positions that require
“access to automated systems that contain active duty, guard, or personally
identifiable information or information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise
protected from disclosure by DOD 5400.11-R. . . “. DOD 5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3(c).
See DOD 5220.6 ¶¶ D5(d) and D8. By a combination of implied retention of ADP
definitions in DOD Manual 5200.02, DOD 5220.6, and the DOD Undersecretary’s
November 2004 memorandum directing DOHA to continue to utilize DOD Directive
5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations for persons
holding sensitive positions (to include those involving ADP I, II, and III positions), 
ADP cases continue to be covered by the process afforded by DOD 5220.6.  
6
 Between 2010 and 2014, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts
that are reflected in her credit reports. Applicant’s incurred delinquent debts warrant
the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts;” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulated debts covered
in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence,
§ 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts are fully
documented in her credit reports and create some judgment issues. See ISCR Case
03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the trust position. While the
principal concern of a non-critical sensitive position holder’s demonstrated financial
difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are
implicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.  
Some extenuating circumstances are indicated in Applicant’s assumed
responsibilities for the care of her two daughters. Considering the available
documented evidence, extenuating circumstances in this record account for some of
Applicant’s debt problems. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency,  a death, divorce, or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending
practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances.” 
Because Applicant did not address her debts while fully employed as a defense
health contractor analyst and apparently able to address them with her available
resources, either directly or through debt consolidation while caring for her two
daughters, she cannot be credited with meeting the acting “responsibly under the
circumstances” prong of MC ¶ 20(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005).
 Applicant’s payment efforts to date are not very encouraging. She has not
provided any documentation of payment or otherwise resoling any of the listed SOR
debts or non-SOR debts she claims to have paid. Debts she has disputed (SOR debts
¶ 1.d and 1.l) I) are not corroborated by any documentation in the record. Accordingly,
neither MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” nor MC ¶ 20(e), “the individual
has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the
dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue,” are available to mitigate
Applicant’s delinquent debts. 
7
Based on the evidence of record, none of the other mitigating conditions
covered by Guideline F are available to Applicant. And while this case is now covered
by the new AGs in force for cases decided after June 8, 2017, careful consideration
was given to the pre-June 8, 2017 detailed mitigating conditions when weighing the
facts and circumstances of Applicant’s case. No different result would occur were the
case to have been decided under the previous AGs in place at hearing.  
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) Applicant’s lack of demonstrated debt repayment efforts
while fully employed is a significant indicator of a lack of any meaningful plan to
address her debts in a responsible manner.
Whole-person assessment in Applicant’s case contains mixed considerations.
Applicant’s 26 years of active military service is worthy of considerable respect and
appreciation. Her honored military service drew considerable praise from colleagues
who worked with her and can attest to her character. Meriting favorable assessment,
too, are her devoted commitments to her two daughters.  
Applicant’s positive contributions are outweighed, however, by her inability to
restore her finances to respectable levels of stability. While committed to paying off
her listed SOR debts, to date she has not been able to initiate meaningful efforts to
address them, consistent with the criteria imposed on applicants seeking eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  
Overall, public trust eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the compiled
documentation and her corroborating testimony does not enable her to establish
judgment and reliability levels sufficient to overcome trust concerns associated with
her accumulation of delinquent debts over a period of several years. Taking into
account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt
accumulations and insufficient probative efforts to resolve her debts, conclusions are
warranted that her finances are insufficiently stabilized at this time to grant her
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:                           Against Applicant
8
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
10
