 
1 
 
                                                              
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06730 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his past-due or delinquent 
debts. His request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On November 6, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have 
access to classified information.1 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
 On May 27, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 On 
June 24, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a 
hearing.  
 
 On August 23, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on September 8, 2016, and was advised he had 30 days 
from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the FORM. The 
record closed after Applicant did not submit additional information before the October 8, 
2016 deadline. I received the case for decision on June 5, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has 
worked since March 2013. He and his wife have been married since August 1989 and 
have two adult children. (FORM, Item 3) 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $11,032 for 
eight delinquent or past-due debts (FORM, Item 1). Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations. (FORM, Item 2). Applicant did not disclose any delinquent debts in his e-
QIP; however, credit reports obtained during his background investigation documented 
the debts alleged in the SOR. The debts documented in this record have been 
delinquent between three and seven years. (FORM, Items 4 and 5).  
 
 Applicant has not presented any information that shows he has paid or otherwise 
resolved any of the debts alleged. Nor has he presented any information regarding the 
reasons for his indebtedness or the current state of his finances. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
                                                 
2 The SOR was issued under the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued a new version of the AG, to be 
effective for all adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have applied the new AG. 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
3 
 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them, as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. The only purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.7  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.8 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, 
at AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 Directive, E3.1.14. 
7 Directive, E3.1.15. 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
9 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
 More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Applicant has not produced information that supports any of the 
AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. The security concerns under this guideline remain. 
    
 In addition to my application of the adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(d). Applicant is not required to be debt free; however, the Government is entitled to 
assurances that unpaid debts are not the result of poor judgment or that may raise the 
risk of misconduct. Without such assurances, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability 
for access to classified information. Because protection of the interests of national 
security is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                           
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
 
