 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01717   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns regarding his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness raised by his 
2012 conviction and 2013 arrest for driving under the influence (DUI).  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the criminal conduct and alcohol 
consumption guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On June 23, 2016, 
I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2 The parties 
complied with the Order. At the hearing, which proceeded as scheduled on July 15, 
2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Hearing Exhibits I – II, 
without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted AE A and B. Both documents 
are admitted without objection. The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) 
received the transcript (Tr.) on July 26, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 47, has worked for a federal contractor as an information technology 
professional since March 2013. He completed a security clearance application, his first, 
in May 2014. In response to questions about his police record, Applicant disclosed two 
DUI arrests in 2012 and 2013, respectively. He discussed these arrests during his July 
2014 interview with a background investigator. Applicant’s disclosures are the basis of 
the SOR allegations, which Applicant denied in his Answer.3  
 
 In February 2012, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol. Applicant and his wife consumed alcohol from approximately 10 o’clock at night 
to 7 o’clock in the morning. After sleeping for a couple of hours, Applicant decided to go 
to work. He testified that he felt groggy and hungover, but “not overly intoxicated.” He 
felt capable of driving and working a full day. He completed 39 miles of his 40 mile 
commute before pulling into a parking lot around the corner from his job to rest. The 
police, responding to a wellness check requested by a passer-by, found Applicant sitting 
behind the steering wheel with the keys in the ignition. Suspecting Applicant of being 
intoxicated, the police performed field sobriety tests and executed a breathalyzer. 
Although he does not remember the result of the breathalyzer, Applicant did not dispute 
evidence that his blood alcohol content (BAC) measured at .20. He was arrested at 11 
o’clock in the morning. In June 2012, Applicant pleaded guilty to driving or being in 
actual physical control with an alcohol concertation of .20 or more within two hours of 
driving, a class I misdemeanor. Accepting his guilty plea, the court sentenced Applicant 
to 60 months’ unsupervised probation, substance abuse screening and treatment, an 
18-month interlock device restriction, and 45 days in jail with 31 days suspended.4 
 
A year after his conviction, Applicant was arrested again and charged with 
aggravated DUI and other traffic violations. After getting into an argument with his wife, 
Applicant decided to ride his motorcycle. He ended up at a bar, where he consumed 
alcohol for at least two hours while watching a baseball game. Feeling unimpaired, 
Applicant rode home. On his way, Applicant sped past a police officer, who measured 
Applicant’s speed at 93 miles per hour. While following the Applicant, the officer 
                                                          
2 This amended order changed the filing date of the pre-haring submissions from July 16, 2016 to July 6, 
2016.  
 
3 Tr. 40; GE 1; Answer. 
 
4 Tr. 43-46, 68-76; GE 1, 4.  
 
3 
 
observed Applicant swerving between lanes as his speed fluctuated. Initially, the police 
officer activated her emergency lights and pursued Applicant in an attempt to conduct a 
traffic stop, but was ordered to end pursuit after reporting Applicant’s rate of speed and 
failure to stop. The officer resumed following Applicant using siren and lights when he 
slowed down to enter his neighborhood. 5  
 
Still unaware of the officer, Applicant rode home. When the police officer 
approached him in his driveway, Applicant asked for his lawyer. He continued to ask for 
counsel over the next few hours as he was transported to jail and processed. The 
police, with Applicant’s consent, measured Applicant’s BAC with three breathalyzer 
tests and a blood test. The breathalyzer tests showed a BAC raging between .26 and 
.29. The blood test measured Applicant’s BAC at .28. Applicant was not prosecuted for 
this offense. Finding that the police violated Applicant’s right to counsel, the court 
dismissed the charges with prejudice.6  
 
Applicant’s testimony raised questions about his good-faith efforts to comply with 
the terms of sentence on the 2012 DUI. Applicant admitted that as part of the sentence 
for the 2012 conviction, he knew that he was required to install an interlock device on 
any car that he drove. Applicant interpreted the restriction as applying to only one of the 
two cars that he and his wife owned, claiming that he never drove the other car. He did 
not believe the order applied to his motorcycle, which he was riding at the time of his 
2013 arrest. 7 
 
Applicant claimed that interlock devices were not available for motorcycles in 
2012. He then explained that he believed he had permission to ride the motorcycle 
without the interlock device because his reinstated license showed a motorcycle 
endorsement. On cross examination, Applicant admitted that that he decided not to 
have the device installed on his motorcycle because he interpreted the order as 
applying to only automobiles, which he did not believe included motorcycles. On the 
contrary, the record shows Applicant fully understood the extent of the interlock 
restriction. According to the June 2012 plea agreement he signed, Applicant agreed to 
install an interlock device “on any motor vehicle that he operated in exchange for the 
suspension of 31 days of his jail sentence.” Even during his drunken exchange with the 
police officer during his 2013 arrest, Applicant demonstrated his understanding of the 
interlock restriction. Without prompting, Applicant informed the officer of the interlock 
restriction. When the officer asked Applicant if he should be riding the motorcycle, he 
responded, “I shouldn’t be, but I was hoping you would let me slide.”8  
 
During his direct examination, Applicant offered a sanitized version of the events 
surrounding his 2012 and 2013 arrests, omitting material facts. Toward the end of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. 47, 49. 
 
6 Tr. 51-54. 
  
7 Tr. 76.  
 
8 Tr. 47-49, 77-78, 102; GE 2.  
 
4 
 
hearing, on cross examination, Applicant admitted that he was driving a company- 
issued vehicle during the 2012 DUI arrest. Applicant testified that he reported the 
incident to his manger and surrendered the company car without any disciplinary action 
being taken against him. According to Applicant’s security clearance application, he left 
that job the month after his arrest. On the application, he gave his reason for leaving as 
being “unhappy with [his] work situation after not receiving a deserved promotion.” At 
hearing, Applicant citied “poor management” and “intercompany issues” because 
management “decided to overlook some employees for promotion and to the save the 
jobs of some employees that they should not have.” Applicant was unemployed for the 
next five months. He claims he was taking some time off between jobs.9  
 
When testifying about the 2013 arrest, Applicant failed to mention during his 
testimony that after leaving the bar, he went to a grocery store and purchased more 
alcohol that he intended to drink at home. On cross examination, Applicant said that he 
walked to the store from the bar, contradicting the statement he gave during his July 
2014 interview that he rode his motorcycle to the store before riding home. Applicant 
claims not to remember anything about his interaction with the police officer that 
approached him in his driveway beyond his repeatedly ignored request for counsel. 
According to the police report, Applicant told the police office that he was coming from 
the grocery store where he intended to buy milk, but left the store without buying 
anything. Applicant repeatedly denied having consumed any alcohol. Eventually, he 
admitted having two small beers. While talking to the police officer, Applicant removed 
his jacket, dislodging a bottle of vodka, which fell to the ground. Applicant denied that 
the unopened bottle belonged to him. Applicant repeatedly asked the officer to let him 
go with a warning that he was being “bad boy.” He even offered to be the officer’s best 
friend if she let him go.10  
 
In addition to his own, Applicant offered the testimony of two character 
witnesses: his facility security officer (FSO) and his department manager. Both provided 
favorable assessments of Applicant’s security worthiness based on their professional 
relationships with him. Neither witness was aware, until under cross examination, that 
Applicant was on unsupervised probation until July 2017. Applicant claims to have 
disclosed his probation status on his job application with his current employer. However, 
that document is not in the record. Applicant did not disclose his probation status on his 
security clearance application when he listed the details of his 2012 conviction. Both 
character witnesses testified that neither Applicant’s probation status nor his failure to 
disclose it to them before the hearing changed their favorable assessment of his 
security worthiness.11 
 
Applicant does not believe that he has a problem with alcohol, but  claims that he 
has abstained from it since his 2013 arrest. He believes drinking alcohol is not 
compatible with his lifestyle. With his Answer to the SOR, Applicant submitted a signed 
                                                          
9 Tr. 111-114. 
 
10 Tr. 82-93; GE 2, GE 5.  
 
11 Tr. 14-38, 55-56, 105-109; GE 1. 
 
5 
 
statement of intent not to abuse alcohol in the future with automatic revocation of his 
clearance for any future violations. Before the hearing, Applicant asked his primary care 
physician to evaluate him for alcohol abuse. Applicant did not show the physician copies 
of the SOR or police reports from his arrests. He only talked to the doctor about his 
alcohol consumption. It is unclear if the doctor performed any tests. In a one sentence 
note scrawled his prescription pad, the physician indicated, “[Applicant] does not 
demonstrate alcohol abuse sign or symptoms.”12 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Criminal activity calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
law, rules, and regulations, as well as a doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, 
                                                          
12  55-56, 59-62, 94, 95-98; AE B. 
 
 
6 
 
and trustworthiness.13 Applicant pleaded guilty to DUI in June 2012 and was charged 
with, but not convicted for DUI again in June 2013. Applicant’s criminal conduct is 
disqualifying.14 He is on unsupervised probation for the 2012 conviction until July 2017, 
which is also disqualifying.15 Applicant failed to submit enough information to mitigate 
the criminal conduct concern. These the incidents continue to cast doubt on  Applicant’s 
security worthiness. 
 
 In addition to breaking the law, Applicant disregarded the terms of his 2012 plea 
agreement. In exchange for reduced jail time, Applicant agreed to install an interlock 
device on “any motor vehicle he operated.” He was left to his own recognizance to 
install the devices as required. He chose to comply minimally by installing the device on 
only one of the two cars to which he had access and to violate the order completely by 
riding his motorcycle. His conduct shows that he may be similarly dismissive of rules 
and regulations attendant to the handling and safeguarding of classified information. 
 
 Applicant’s testimony at hearing revealed an inability to provide full, frank, and 
candid statements to the government about his actions. Self-reporting is the hallmark of 
the security clearance process and is key to the fiduciary relationship between the 
government and a clearance holder. The government must be able, with a high degree 
of confidence, believe that a clearance holder will self-report a potential security 
violation even in the face of adverse consequences. Based on his behavior at hearing, I 
conclude Applicant is unlikely to do so.  
 
The record contains some favorable information. Applicant’s last alcohol-related 
criminal conduct occurred almost four years ago. In an effort to show evidence of 
rehabilitation and reform, Applicant claims that he has abstained from alcohol since his 
2013 arrest and provided evidence to suggest that he does not have an ongoing alcohol 
problem. However, these facts do not mitigate the criminal conduct concerns.   
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant’s two DUIs are also disqualifying under the alcohol consumption 
guideline. An applicant’s history of excessive alcohol consumption becomes a security 
concern when it serves as direct evidence of questionable judgment and a failure to 
control impulses.16 The 2012 incident is disqualifying as an alcohol-related incident at 
work.17 But for his arrest, which occurred one mile from his office, Applicant intended to 
report to work intoxicated. The 2013 DUI arrest, is disqualifying as an alcohol-related 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 30. 
 
14 AG 31(a), (c).  
 
15 AG 31(d). 
 
16 AG ¶ 21. 
 
17 AG 22(b).  
 
7 
 
incident away from work.18 His DUI arrests are also evidence of habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment.19  
 
The nature of the two DUIs shows serious flaws in Applicant’s judgment. On two 
occasions, Applicant binged on alcohol to intoxication. In 2012, he chose to operate a 
vehicle and attempted to report to work with a BAC more than twice the legal limit. He 
did so again in 2013, speeding on a motorcycle with a BAC more than three times the 
legal limit. In each instance, his conduct showed a reckless disregard for the law, his 
safety, and that of others who happened to share the road with him. Applicant offers as 
mitigating evidence his four years of abstinence from alcohol, an opinion from his 
primary care physician that Applicant does not exhibit the signs or symptoms of alcohol 
abuse, and a statement of intent not to abuse alcohol in the future agreeing to an 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any future violations.  These facts 
carry little weight toward mitigating the concerns raised by Applicant’s history of alcohol 
consumption.  
 
Given Applicant’s lack of credibility, I am unable to accept his claims of 
abstinence as truthful. The opinion of his doctor does little to bolster Applicant’s claims 
because the doctor did not provide the basis for his opinion. Applicant’s statement of 
intent carries no weight. Applicant past behavior indicates that he will treat the 
restrictions on his personal behavior in the same manner he handled the interlock 
device restriction of his 2012 plea agreement.  For these reasons and those explained 
in the discussion of the criminal conduct section above, none of the alcohol 
consumption mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. The 
purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of a sufficient 
period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable security risk.”20 Although Applicant’s alcohol-related criminal conduct 
happened several years ago, he failed to mitigate the concerns about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness raised by these incidents. Overall he has shown a pattern 
of dishonesty and an inability to follow rules and regulations that make him an 
unacceptable security risk.  
                                                          
18 AG ¶ 22 (a). 
 
19 AG ¶ 22 (c).  
 
20 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Alcohol Consumption:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
