 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-08688 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Donald L. Stansbarger, Esquire 
 
 
July 11, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1976 to December 2013. 
He used marijuana from 2005 through 2007 while holding a security clearance. Applicant 
falsified two government questionnaires, one in 2005 and one in 2013, concerning his 
drug use. He also lied to a Government investigator concerning his drug use during an 
interview in 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on November 12, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) On June 15, 2016, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on July 12, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on August 19, 2016. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on August 
24, 2016. The case was reassigned to me on August 29, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on September 13, 2016. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on October 24, 2016. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered Applicant Exhibits A through D, which were admitted without objection, and 
testified on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until 
November 10, 2016, to permit him to submit additional evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 1, 2016. On November 9, 2016, he submitted 
Applicant Exhibit E, to which Department Counsel had no objection. The exhibit was 
admitted into the record, which then closed as scheduled.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 69-year-old consultant to the DoD. He has a master’s degree. 
Applicant is divorced with two children. He is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted in connection with his consultant work with the DoD. He has held a 
security clearance at various times during his career. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has used illegal drugs. Applicant denied both allegations under this 
paragraph, with explanations. 
 
 1.a Applicant used marijuana off and on for about 40 years. The periods of use 
were 1976 to 1980, 1988 to 1995, 2001 to 2007, and 2009 to 2013. During those periods 
he would use marijuana on approximately a monthly basis. Accordingly, considering all 
of his periods of use, Applicant smoked marijuana somewhere between 250 and 300 
times. Applicant stated that he used marijuana during times of stress. He would acquire 
marijuana from acquaintances. (Government Exhibit 3; Tr. 14-15, 22-30, 35-41, 67-68.)  
 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.b Applicant first obtained a security clearance in approximately 2005 or 2006, 
when he worked for a defense contractor. He held this clearance until about 2007. There 
is evidence that Applicant used marijuana during this period, particularly Applicant’s 
answers to DoD interrogatories, as well as what he told an interviewer for the DoD. 
(Government Exhibit 3.) In his Answer, Applicant denied using marijuana during this 
period while holding a security clearance. He testified that his written and oral statements 
concerning drug use in 2006 or 2007 in Government Exhibit 3 were “an error” on his part.  
(Tr. 18-20, 30-35, 44-45.) I have examined all the available evidence, and also considered 
the questions about Applicant’s credibility as an accurate reporter of his drug use, as 
further described below. I find that there is sufficient evidence to find that he used drugs 
while holding a security clearance.   
 
Applicant stated that he has not used any marijuana since 2013, and he does not 
intend to use marijuana in the future. He submitted a signed statement of intent not to use 
illegal drugs in the future. Applicant agreed that such use could result in automatic 
revocation of his security clearance. (Government Exhibit 3; Applicant Exhibit E at 8; Tr. 
15-16, 21-23.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct) 
 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has engaged in conduct that shows poor judgment, untrustworthiness or 
unreliability. Applicant denied subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c under this paragraph. He 
admitted subparagraph 2.d. The allegations will be discussed in chronological order: 
 
2.c Applicant first filled out a Security Clearance Application on August 1, 2005. 
(Government Exhibit 2.) Question 27 of that application asked Applicant whether he had 
used marijuana within the last seven years. Applicant answered the question, “No.” This 
was a false answer to a relevant question about Applicant’s drug use. Applicant denied 
this allegation in his Answer, however he admitted it during his testimony at the hearing. 
Applicant further stated that his decision to put down a false answer was “an error in 
judgment.” (Tr. 16-17, 43.)  
 
2.a Applicant filled out an e-QIP on November 12, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) 
Section 23 of the questionnaire asks Applicant about his drug use history. First of all, that 
section asked whether Applicant had used marijuana during the previous seven years. 
Applicant stated, “No.” This was a false answer to a relevant question concerning 
Applicant’s drug use history. Applicant admitted his intentional falsification of this 
questionnaire during his testimony at the hearing. Once again, Applicant stated that his 
decision to put down a false answer was “an error in judgment.” (Tr. 45-46, 67, 73-76.) 
 
 2.b Another part of Section 23 of Government Exhibit 1 asked Applicant, “Have 
you EVER illegally used or otherwise been involved with a drug or controlled substance 
while possessing a security clearance other than previously listed?” Applicant answered, 
 
 
4 
 
 
“No.” This was also a false answer to a relevant question about his prior drug use, since 
I have found that he used marijuana during the period from 2005 through 2007.  
 
2.d Applicant was subsequently questioned by an investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management on May 4, 2015. The investigator prepared a written Report of 
Investigation (ROI). Applicant certified in writing on May 16, 2016, that the ROI accurately 
reflected the information Applicant provided to the interviewer, and Applicant agreed with 
and adopted the investigator's summary as accurately reflecting the interview. 
(Government Exhibit 3.) 
 
As part of the interview Applicant was asked whether he had used marijuana within 
the last seven years, or whether he had used marijuana while holding a security 
clearance. He answered no to both questions. The investigator goes on to report: 
 
The Subject [Applicant] was then confronted with illegal drug use, 
marijuana, from 1972 to 2013 (discrepant) that was developed during the 
investigation. The Subject stated he didn’t answer yes on his 2014 case 
papers nor during the interview of his illegal drug use because it is personal 
use and shouldn’t affect his professional life. The subject felt this information 
is private and none of anyone’s business. The Subject then stated that he 
didn’t list it on his case papers because marijuana use is illegal and he didn’t 
want to admit to illegal activities on his case papers nor during the interview. 
The Subject then decided to admit his illegal drug use because he has to 
be open and honest. (Government Exhibit 3 at 11-12.) 
 
 During the hearing Applicant first admitted that he actively lied to the investigator, 
as described above. (Tr. 20-22, 46-50.) A short time later in the hearing, Applicant testified 
that he had not lied to the investigator, but instead was telling the investigator about why 
he had previously lied on the questionnaire. Applicant’s testimony on this point was 
disjointed and rather confusing, but basically revolved around interviews Applicant had 
with investigators for another Government agency. Applicant stated that during those 
interviews he had told the other agency about his drug use. Other than Applicant’s 
testimony, no evidence was submitted as to the substance of the interviews with another 
agency. (Tr. 50-63.)  
 
 Based on all of the available information, I find that Applicant did actively lie during 
the interview on May 4, 2015. Support for this conclusion includes Applicant’s admission 
of the allegation in his Answer, his affirmation of the contents of Government Exhibit 3, 
and his initial testimony affirming his active lying to the investigator.   
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant is a man of great professional accomplishment over many years. He is 
well-known in his field and greatly respected. Letters of recommendation were submitted 
for Applicant from people who know him personally and professionally. They are all 
 
 
5 
 
 
extremely laudatory. However, none of the writers indicate any knowledge of the contents 
of the SOR or the nature of these proceedings. (Applicant Exhibit E at 3-7.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The security concern relating to Drug Involvement is set forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. §802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted 
in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. (Emphasis in 
original.)  
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
 (f) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 have also been considered, but 
are not controlling: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant has a 40-year history of using marijuana. While he did not use marijuana 
consistently during those years, he did use it over approximately a 25 year period. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant knew during this entire time that his drug use was a violation of Federal law. He 
stopped using marijuana about three years ago, but under the particular circumstances 
of this case that period is insufficient to support a finding for Applicant under this guideline. 
Paragraph 1 is found against the Applicant.  
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant knowingly falsified material facts about his drug use on two Government 
questionnaires. One was in 2005 and the other in 2013. Applicant states that these 
actions were “errors of judgment.” In addition, Applicant also falsified his answers during 
an interview with a Government investigator. Applicant admitted doing that in his Answer, 
than attempted to obfuscate the facts during his hearing testimony. Applicant has been 
shown on multiple occasions not to be a trustworthy reporter of his own conduct. None of 
the mitigating conditions apply to the conduct in this case. Paragraph 2 is found against 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not mitigated his 
long-term marijuana use, or his repeated falsifications to the Government. Overall, the 
record evidence does create substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and 
suitability for national security eligibility and a security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
