 
1 
 
                                                              
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-05157 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his past-due or delinquent 
debts. His request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. As part of his background 
investigation, a government investigator interviewed Applicant on March 19, 2015. After 
reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) 
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
 
 On February 8, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 
On February 23, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision 
without a hearing.  
 
 On April 27, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on May 18, 2016, and was advised he had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the FORM. The record 
closed after Applicant did not submit additional information before the June 17, 2016 
deadline. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $30,855 for two 
delinquent credit card accounts (SOR 1.a and 1.b). Applicant admitted, with 
explanations, both allegations. (FORM 1). Applicant disclosed his financial problems in 
his e-QIP, and he discussed his debts during his interview with a Government 
investigator. Credit reports obtained by the Government during his background 
investigation also document both debts. In addition to the facts thus established, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has 
worked since January 2010. He and his wife have been married since January 1999. 
They have a five-year-old child. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is a skilled tradesman who opened his own business in March 2006. 
That business failed in 2009 with the decline in the national economy. When his 
business failed, Applicant was unable to stay current on the accounts listed in the SOR. 
They became delinquent in the first half of 2013, and they remain unpaid. Applicant 
claims he has tried to negotiate with his creditors and that he has resolved other 
delinquent debts left from his business failure. He did not provide any information to 
support his claims or to show actions taken to resolve his financial problems. Applicant 
has worked for his current employer for the past seven years, but he also did not 
provide any information about his current finances. (FORM, Items 1 – 5) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
                                                 
2 The SOR was issued under the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued a new version of the AG, to be 
effective for all adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have applied the new AG. 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
4 Directive, 6.3. 
 
3 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. The only purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.7  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.8 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.9 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 Directive, E3.1.14. 
 
7 Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
9 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, 
at AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
 More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Because of the circumstances of Applicant’s business failure in 
2009, I also considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 While Applicant’s business failure was unusual or beyond his control, Applicant 
did not establish he acted responsibly under the circumstances. As of the close of the 
record, his debts were more than three years old. The record contains no information 
showing action to resolve his debts or reflective of his current finances. Available 
information requires a conclusion that the security concerns under this guideline remain.  
  
 
5 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). This record raises significant 
doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Applicant is not 
required to be debt free; however, the Government is entitled to assurances that unpaid 
debts are not the result of poor judgment or that an individual is not at risk of engaging 
in misconduct to resolve financial delinquencies. Applicant has not produced any 
information that addresses the doubts about his suitability for access to classified 
information raised by the Government’s information. Because protection of the national 
interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
