 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07062 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017 for all 
 
2 
 
 
decisions after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the 
SOR. Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my 
decision in this case. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 20, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on July 26, 2016. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant responded to the FORM on August 17, 2016. He provided a 
statement and two additional documents, which are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through C and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not object to the 
Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the 
pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2017. On May 11, 2017, I e-mailed the 
parties and reopened the record until May 25, 2017, to allow Applicant the opportunity to 
provide updated information.1 Applicant provided e-mail responses, but no documents, 
on May 17, 2017, and May 18, 2017. Those e-mails are marked AE D and AE E, and 
admitted without objection.2 Department Counsel’s e-mails in response have also been 
considered. Applicant then requested, and was granted, until June 7, 2017 to submit 
documentation, but he did not do so.3 On June 29, 2017, I provided Applicant a copy of 
the new AGs by e-mail, and gave him additional time, until July 12, 2017, to review the 
document and respond.4 He did not submit additional documentation. The record closed 
on July 12, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶ 1.b with explanations. I have 
incorporated his admissions and other comments into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He and his wife have been married since 2001. He has 
two college-aged stepchildren from her prior marriage. Since about April 2007, Applicant 
has worked for various government contractors. He was laid off from a prior position in 
September 2011. He was then unemployed until April 2012, when he was hired for his 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
2 HE II.  
 
3 HE III.  
 
4 HE IV.  
 
 
3 
 
 
current position. Applicant’s wife also lost her job in October 2013, and was unemployed 
for about nine months.5  
  
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in July 2014. He 
disclosed that after his wife lost her job, they fell behind on their mortgage but were 
attempting re-financing.6  His wife did not receive a severance. She was the “breadwinner” 
in the family, though there are no record details about her income, either then or now. 
Applicant indicates that around this time, their mortgage also doubled, from $1,100 to 
$2,200 a month. Property taxes increased from $2,100 to $3,500 a year. Their 
homeowner’s insurance also increased from $700 to $2,880 a year. They were also 
paying college tuition for their two sons. They fell behind on their mortgage payments, 
student loans and other debts. He indicates that they made an effort to reduce their 
monthly expenses, sold many household items, and returned a car that they were 
leasing.7  
 
 Applicant and his wife entered a debt relief program and were told that filing 
bankruptcy was the only way to save their home. They filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
November 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.a). They declared $284,439 in secured claims (most of which 
was their $280,521 mortgage). They declared $137,717 in unsecured claims, including 
federal and other student loans, credit cards and other consumer debts, and an auto 
repossession. Among these was SOR ¶ 1.b, an $11,000 judgment regarding a home 
equity loan. Applicant denied ¶ 1.b because he said it would be resolved under the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan.8   
 
 The Government’s evidence included various documents related to the 
bankruptcy: a) the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition and related schedules; b) the 
bankruptcy trustee’s objection to confirmation of the plan;9 c) the bankruptcy judge’s July 
21, 2016 order confirming Applicant’s modified Chapter 13 plan; d) a proof of claim from 
the department of taxation for Applicant’s home state, reflecting that as of December 31, 
2015, he and his wife owed about $715 in past-due state taxes; and e) a proof of claim 
filed by the Internal Revenue Service reflecting that as of May 20, 2016, Applicant owed 
about $15,590 in past-due federal taxes.10 These documents did not include information 
on Applicant’s monthly household income and expenses.  
 
                                                          
5 Item 2; Answer; AE A, AE E.  
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Items 1, 2, 3; AE A.  
 
8 Item 1; Item 5; AE A. 
 
9 Item 5.  
 
10 Item 5.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant and his wife had paid $2,800 into the plan since December 17, 2015. 
Beginning on May 17, 2016, they were to pay $700 a month for ten months, and then pay 
$1,415 a month for the remaining 45 months of the plan.11 Applicant did not submit any 
documentation with his FORM Response that he and his wife maintained compliance with 
the plan. (AE A) 
 
 Applicant provided two documents concerning his mortgage. AE B is a June 2016 
consent order proposing that Applicant and his wife resume making monthly mortgage 
payments of $2,082 to cure a $15,600 arrearage. AE C indicates that, as of July 27, 2016, 
his mortgage company had approved a modification of the mortgage and that he was 
eligible for a short sale and a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure.12 Applicant indicated that the 
house was on the market as of August 1, 2016.13 
 
Applicant provided updated information, but no documents, in his May 2017 e-
mails. He indicated that the Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed in November 2016. He 
and his wife then filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in January 2017, which he said 
was discharged on April 24, 2017. He also indicated that their home was under contract 
for more than the full amount owed. Applicant’s plan was to use the proceeds of their 
impending house sale (July 2017) to pay off any remaining debts. He stated that their 
financial situation has improved since the bankruptcy, but provided no supporting 
documentation. Applicant also explained that his $15,590 tax debt was a consequence of 
using his wife’s 401k plan as a financial resource to pay debts. He indicated that they 
were currently paying on their past-due taxes, but offered no specifics. Applicant did not 
submit any subsequent information, and no corroborating documentation.14  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.15 As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
11 Item 5. 
 
12 AE C.  
 
13 AE A.  
 
14 AE D, AE E.  
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
16 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.17 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant and his wife fell behind on their mortgage and many other bills after they 
both went through periods of unemployment. They filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2015. 
The $11,000 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b) is listed in the bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a) among about 
$283,000 in secured claims; $137,000 in unsecured claims; and about $16,000 in past- 
due state and federal taxes. Other than the judgment, these debts themselves are not 
specifically alleged. However, the bankruptcy proceeding is sufficient to establish the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The periods of unemployment that Applicant and his wife experienced were 
circumstances beyond their control that impacted their ability to pay their mortgage and 
other expenses. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. They sought credit counseling from 
a debt relief service and filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in late 2015. Applicant indicated that 
they were not able to meet their approved payment plan, so they refiled under Chapter 7, 
and that bankruptcy was discharged in April 2017. However, given the lack of supporting 
documentation, I cannot find that AG ¶ 20(b) is fully established.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 It is reasonable to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.18 Applicant submitted no documentation and no details 
concerning his Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding. SOR ¶ 1.a is therefore unresolved. He 
also provided no documentation to establish that the judgment at SOR ¶ 1.b has been 
resolved, either through bankruptcy or otherwise.  
 
 Even if Applicant had submitted corroborating documentation of the bankruptcy 
discharge, that would not have been sufficient to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his financial difficulties. A discharge in bankruptcy may give a person a financial 
fresh start, but it does not substitute for evidence of a demonstrated track record of 
financial reform, a track record that is necessary to satisfy Applicant's burden of 
persuasion that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him access 
classified information.19 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy because he was not able 
to meet the approved Chapter 13 repayment plan. He has not provided sufficient evidence 
of his good-faith efforts to repay his creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant indicated that he pursued credit counseling both before and after filing 
bankruptcy. However, he provided no documented information since then about his 
monthly income and expenses, and he has outstanding past-due tax debt. Applicant’s tax 
debt was not alleged in the SOR. However, unalleged conduct may be considered: (a) to 
assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to decide whether a particular provision of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) as part of a whole person analysis.20  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation to corroborate his statement that he is 
current on any tax repayment efforts. If there is an agreed-upon plan in place, there is no 
documentation of it. His past-due state and federal tax debts remain unresolved. There 
is also no specific information about the family’s current finances. Without additional 
evidence, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not fully apply.  
 
 Likewise, given the limited documentation submitted, there is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that his financial issues are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 1, 2006)). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 98-0445 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 1999). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Because Applicant requested a determination 
on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility based on 
demeanor.21 He did not provide sufficient documented information that his financial 
problems are in the past. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
