KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge does not address the extent to which Applicant’s financial problems do not
explain her failure to have filed her returns at all. Difficulty in meeting financial obligations do
no provide a plausible excuse to failing to meet an important legal requirement, such as filing
returns when due. Indeed, the Directive cites failure to file returns as a disqualifying condition in
and of itself, irrespective of whether the underlying taxes have actually been paid. Favorable
decision reversed.
CASENO: 15-03019.a1
DATE: 07/05/2017
DATE: July 5, 2017
In Re:
---------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-03019
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 12, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 9, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Claude Heiny granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision ran contrary to the weight of the record evidence and whether the Judge’s whole-person
analysis was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal:  Applicant
has been employed by a Defense contractor since mid-2012.  Her annual salary is about $80,000. 
Applicant and her husband separated in 2003 but are still married.  In 2004 she was fired from a job
due to inappropriate conduct with another employee.  After that she experienced periods of
unemployment and at times held down two jobs to provide for her family.
In her 2012 security clearance application (SCA) Applicant stated that she had not filed
Federal income tax returns.  In a background interview, she admitted that she had not filed those
returns for tax years 2006 through 2011.  After her husband left in 2003, she did not have sufficient
funds withheld from her pay.  This was in order to afford living expenses.  She hired a tax
professional to assist in filing her returns, although he failed to do so and is no longer in business. 
She discovered that someone had apparently stolen her identity and received a refund check.  She
hired another firm that advertises on television but got little results.
In 2012 she hired a tax company that filed her returns for 2006 through 2011.  She made an
agreement with the IRS to pay $800 a month toward satisfying her debt.  She entered into another
installment agreement in 2016 to pay $500 a month.  This will resolve $35,000 in past-due taxes that
include obligations for 2012 through 2014.  In addition, Applicant owes about $5,000 resulting from
repossession of a vehicle.  She has offered to settle this debt, although it is beyond the statute of
limitations.  In addition, she paid off an $8,200 lien for taxes owed in 2002 and 2003.  
Applicant has been a victim of financial fraud, resulting in her having to open and close five
checking accounts.  The most recent incident occurred in January 2016, when someone wrote a
check for $300 on her account.  She has received financial counseling and lives a frugal life.
The Judge’s Analysis
Though acknowledging Applicant’s duty to file and pay taxes, the Judge cited to evidence
that Applicant’s conduct was done to provide for her children.  He cited to evidence of her efforts
to resolve her tax problems, such as her having resolved a tax lien and her 2016 payment plan with
the IRS.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted that Applicant is trying to resolve the debt
resulting from the vehicle repossession.  He stated that she is not living beyond her means and wants
to address her financial problems.  
Discussion
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted
or proven facts.  The applicant has the burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable decision. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).  
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s favorable conclusions are not supported by a
reasonable interpretation of the evidence.  He states that the Judge did not examine Applicant’s
security-significant conduct as a cumulative whole, thereby impairing his favorable conclusions
about her judgment and reliability.  
As Department Counsel argues, the application of Mitigating Conditions does not turn on
finding simply that one or more apply to the facts of a case.  The Directive requires a Judge to
consider the entire record in evaluating the extent to which an applicant has met his or her burden
of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00321 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2015).  Evaluating the
totality of the evidence in Guideline F cases, even those in which the applicant has actually paid his
or her debts, requires consideration of the circumstances underlying the debts for what they may
reveal about the applicant’s judgment and reliability.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3-4
(App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does
not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access
to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case 14-06808 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016).
We note the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s payment plan with the IRS.  We also note
his findings about Applicant’s financial difficulties, which had an effect on her tax problems.  These
were matters that the Judge was required to consider, along with all the other evidence in the record. 
However, we are persuaded by Department Counsel’s argument that the Decision does not devote
reasonable attention to evidence that contravenes its favorable conclusion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (A Judge is not required to discuss each and every piece of
record evidence in making a decision, but the Judge cannot ignore, disregard, or fail to discuss
significant record evidence that a reasonable person could expect to be taken into account in
reaching a fair and reasoned decision).  For example, Department Counsel cites to Applicant’s
clearance interview, in which she stated that she had failed to file tax returns for a few years prior
to 2000, which predated her job loss and marital separation.1  This evidence is not consistent with
the impression that unfortunate events in the early 2000s led to debt problems that required
Applicant to prioritize her spending in order to meet the needs of her children, as she presented it
at the hearing.  More significantly, the Judge does not address the extent to which Applicant’s
financial problems do not explain her failure to have filed her returns at all.  While difficulty in
meeting financial obligations may force an applicant to choose the order in which he or she
addresses unpaid debts, they do not provide a plausible excuse to failing to meet an important legal
requirement, such as filing returns when due.  Indeed, the Directive cites failure to file returns as a
disqualifying condition in and of itself, irrespective of whether the underlying taxes have actually
been paid, as through withholding, etc.  The Judge’s failure to address this circumstance
significantly impairs his favorable analysis.  Indeed, when discussing this failure, the Judge merely
cites it as a result of Applicant’s financial problems without giving due consideration to the question
of whether such problems actually explain or extenuate the failure.  
As Department Counsel notes, the Judge mitigated Applicant’s concerns through application
of Mitigating Condition 20(d).  However, the Judge’s treatment of this condition, as it applies to
Applicant’s tax delinquencies, is conclusory.  He states that Applicant had made a good-faith effort
to resolve the tax debt but does not address that Applicant had been unable to meet the terms of an
earlier payment plan, which she terminated after only two months in 2012 due to difficulty in
meeting the payments.  It is not clear why the Judge concludes that Applicant will be able to meet
the terms of her current plan, especially in light of evidence that Applicant entered into it after the
hearing and in light of a paucity of evidence that she has actually made payments.  We have stated
in the past that promises to resolve debts in the future are not a substitute for an actual track record
of payment or resolution.    See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04565 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2015).  Given
the facts of this case, the Decision does not explain how it is that Applicant’s latest payment plan
constitutes anything more than such a promise of future action.  
To summarize, we note the Judge’s findings and record evidence that Applicant has a rather
extensive history of failing to file and/or pay income tax returns.  Her failures go back possibly as
far as 1996 and are as recent as 2014.2  The record does not show that her failures to have done so
were due to unfortunate circumstances outside her control.  Rather, her financial problems were
caused, in significant part, by her own actions, i.e., her having been fired from a job due to
misconduct.  In any event, as stated above, financial problems do not explain her failure to have filed
her returns for many years, irrespective of her inability to pay her taxes.  Applicant entered into a
payment plan with the IRS in 2012 that she could not continue after only a couple of months of
payment.  Tr. at 65.  Her latest plan came after she received the SOR and indeed after the hearing
1“[Applicant] has not filed a Federal tax return for income taxes with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) since
sometime between 1996 and 2000.  She has not filed or paid income taxes during the last seven years (discrepant).  Her
husband . . . decided to not have Federal taxes withheld from his paycheck.  She fell out of paying taxes and has not filed
or paid income taxes since.”  Government Exhibit 5, Interview Summary, at p. 2.  
2Even at the hearing Applicant was not clear as to the full extent of her tax delinquencies.  “[Q]: When you were
interviewed, you indicated that you hadn’t filed since sometime between . . . 1996 and 2000. [A]: No, I don’t know if
I said it like that.  I – what I said was I had not filed, and I wasn’t really sure–I can’t remember verbatim what I said, but
I do know that when I had my interview . . . I had not filed in years . . . Just like today . . . I couldn’t tell him exactly what
years.”  Tr. at 63.  
itself, with the result that there is no evidence of compliance in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-01243 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 18, 2015) (Timing of debt payments is relevant in evaluating an
applicant’s case for mitigation).  The Judge did not explain how these facts establish “good-faith”
under any reasonable interpretation of the Directive.  Neither do these facts support a whole-person
assessment of good judgment on Applicant’s part sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by her
many years of delinquent tax filings.  
After considering the record as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s favorable analysis
failed to consider an important aspect of the case.  We also conclude that the evidence, viewed as
a whole, is not sufficient to meet Applicant’s burden of persuasion under the standard set forth in
Egan, supra.  To the contrary, the Judge’s decision runs contrary to the weight of the record
evidence, as Department Counsel argues, and is not sustainable.
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.    
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
