KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge noted evidence that Applicant believed that his mortgage loans for the
house were bad for him. However, she noted his statement that he had the means to address his
delinquent debts but believes that he is not responsible for doing so. She stated that merely
because applicant decided that the loans for the house were not in his favor he was not justified
in ignoring them. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-00906.a1
DATE: 07/19/2017
DATE: July 19, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-00906
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel 
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 16, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On May 25, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant financed a house that had a high interest rate.  When the economy faltered,
Applicant found that he owed more on the house than it was worth.  He tried to get a loan
modification but was denied.  Upon “the advice of several people” Applicant stopped making
payments.  Decision at 2.  Eventually he found a buyer for a short sale.  Applicant provided no
corroboration for his claim that the first mortgage was resolved through the short sale.  His credit
report shows that the second mortgage had been charged off.  Applicant’s credit report also shows
a delinquent account for nearly $700.  Applicant claimed that it was closed.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted evidence that Applicant believed that his mortgage loans for the house were
bad for him.  However, she noted his statement that he had the means to address his delinquent debts
but believes that he is not responsible for doing so.  She stated that merely because applicant decided
that the loans for the house were not in his favor he was not justified in ignoring them.  Applicant
served in the military from 1994 to 2002 and has held a clearance since 2004.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief provides context for his financial difficulties, and he argues that he is not
the kind of person who would fail to pay his debts.  He believes that his statements as reflected in
the record did not put him in a sufficiently favorable light.  He also cites to his military service and
to his having held a clearance for many years.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the
Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2 App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
