                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 15-07884 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 10 June 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations, Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline E, Personal
Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without hearing by2
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case closed 14
October 2016, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant provided no
additional information. DOHA assigned the case to me 1 July 2017.
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-7.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017. 
1
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.a-1.c, 1.i, and
1.k. He admitted the alcohol incidents, except that he claimed to have paid the fines for
SOR 2.b and 2.c. He denied the SOR personal conduct allegations.
Applicant is a 28-year-old aircraft worker employed by a U.S. defense contractor
since May 2013. He has been employed on the same contract since March 2012,
except for two weeks July-August 2012, when the contract was being transferred
between two companies. He held a series of part-time jobs between August 2006 and
September 2008. He worked three full-time jobs at various times between October 2008
and October 2011,  when he moved to a new state. He was briefly unemployed from3
October  to December 2011, then again from March to July 2012, before obtaining his
current contracts.
Applicant has never married, has no children, and has not served in the military.
He attended college from June 2006 to December 2007. He did not receive a degree.4
He has not previously held a clearance. 
The SOR alleges, and Items 2-5 establish, 13 delinquent debts totaling over
$27,000. Applicant admits five debts totaling nearly $6,900. The debts comprise four
delinquent medical debts totaling $800 (SOR 1.aa-1.c and 1.k); five delinquent
education loans totaling over $23,000 as of his April 2016 credit report (Item 5); a
$6,000 automobile lease judgment (SOR 1.i); and two small personal debts (SOR 1.l-
1.m). Item 2 shows that the amount alleged in SOR 1.j was resolved in Applicant’s favor
in a lawsuit brought by the creditor in March 2008. He claimed, without corroboration, to
have paid SOR debt 1.m (Item 1).
Items 2-3 and 6-8 establish four alcohol-related incidents in July 2007, November
2007, April 2008, and July 2011 (SOR 2.a-2.d). Applicant acknowledged the four
incidents, but later denied SOR 2.b-2.c because he claimed that he had paid the
associated fines. 
Applicant reported his alcohol incidents, his delinquent education loans, and the
judgment on his February 2015 clearance application (Item 2). He discussed these
matters, and additional financial issues, during an April 2015 interview with a
Government investigator (Item 3). He claimed in his clearance application and during
his interview that he was making payments on his education loans. He stated he would
investigate the delinquent debts he discussed with the investigator. He would address
the debts he acknowledged as his, and find out about the debts he did not recognize 
Including working for his father’s construction company on an “as-needed” basis.3
However, he has a trade school certification he obtained at the same time he graduated from high school in4
June 2006.
2
He acknowledged that he still consumes alcohol to the point of intoxication, but claims
that he no longer drives while intoxicated.
Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to his part-time jobs and his brief
unemployments between October 2011 and August 2012. However, he has not
provided specifics to show how his finances were affected, or what efforts he made to
communicate with his creditors. 
Applicant provided no documentation for any of his claimed payments. He
provided no budget or financial statement. He has not documented any credit or
financial counseling. He provided no work or character references, or any evidence of
community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
difficulties, which are ongoing.  He has not documented any of the claimed payments,6
whether for his education loans or for his vehicle fines.
Applicant’s case is a failure of proof. He has not documented that his financial
problems were largely due to circumstances beyond his control. The last of his part-time
jobs ended in September 2008, and his periods of unemployment between October
2011 and August 2012 were brief. Moreover, Applicant provided no details about his
finances during this time, and any steps he took to resolve his delinquent debts. Finally,
he has not documented any contacts with his creditors since his April 2015 interview, or
his claimed payments on his education loans.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations. 
His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple; although the circumstance which
led to his financial situation may be unlikely to recur.  Applicant’s financial problems7
have not been shown to be largely due to circumstances beyond his control, and he has
not documented any action that can be considered responsibly dealing with his
delinquent debts.8
Applicant submitted no evidence to show that he received credit or financial
counseling, and he has not established that these debts are being resolved.  Having not9
documented any of his claimed payments, he cannot establish that he has made a
good-faith effort to address those debts.  Accordingly, I conclude Guideline F against10
Applicant.
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline G, by
demonstrating Applicant’s four alcohol related incidents between July 2007 and July
2011, plus his continued drinking to the point of intoxication since.  Although he claims11
that he no longer drives after drinking, he has provided insufficient information to
¶19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; © a history6
of not meeting financial obligations;
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that7
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and8
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶2(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear indications9
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise10
resolve debts.
¶22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child11
or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
4
support a conclusion that his past alcohol issues do not continue to cause security
concerns.
Applicant does not fully meet any of the mitigating conditions for alcohol
consumption. Applicant does not meet MC 23(a) because while he has had no more
convictions since July 2011, he has continued to drink to the point of intoxication.
Moreover, he fails to meet MC 23(a) because while his alcohol abuse was not recent, it
was frequent, and not particularly unusual in its circumstances. In addition, Applicant
does not meet requirements for MC 23(b) because while he acknowledged his past
problems with alcohol, he continues to drink to the point of intoxication.  He provided12
no documentation that would show responsible use of alcohol. MC 23(c) and MC 23(d)
are inapplicable to the facts of this case.
 Applicant has not abused alcohol since his July 2011 incident. However, I do not
consider the mere passage of time to fully mitigate the security concerns, particularly
where Applicant continues to drink to the point of intoxication since, the absence of any
aftercare programs or support systems, and his continued alcohol consumption, I
cannot conclude Applicant is unlikely to abuse alcohol in the future. Accordingly, I
resolve Guideline G against Applicant.
The Government failed to establish a case for disqualification under Guideline E.
Applicant’s alcohol incidents involve no issue of falsification or false and misleading
information, and the alcohol incidents are fully resolvable under the AG for Alcohol
Consumption. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-i, k-m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph j:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
¶23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of12
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent)
or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
6
