 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08779 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 12, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 28, 2016, and 
had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided a 
response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 5, is 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. She obtained a bachelor’s degree in 1992. Applicant 
has been employed as a military-family-life counselor by a federal contractor since 
August 2014. She reported short periods of unemployment including from November 
2006 to July 2008. She was previously married in 1996 and divorced in 2012. Her ex-
husband lost his job of approximately 12 years, shortly before they divorced. He was out 
of work for over one year. They filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in January 
2008 and had approximately $40,000 in non-priority unsecured debts discharged. They 
later filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in February 2010. That bankruptcy case 
was dismissed in September 2010.   
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 of her security clearance 
application (SCA),2 including medical debts, an automobile repossession and the two 
bankruptcies. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all six of the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR totaling $12,683. Applicant stated “my ex-husband agreed to 
pay for the items listed, but has not paid them to date.” She admitted to all six 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR as well as the two bankruptcies. In respect to the 
delinquent debts, Applicant stated “I could pay them, but I have disputed the items since 
we were not together when the items went into default.” Applicant also explained that 
she has successfully rebuilt her credit rating and paid her car payments, credit card 
bills, and maintained mortgage payments for four years since since the divorce. She 
had taken no actions to resolve the specific financial issues in the SOR at the time when 
she filled out her SCA.  
 
In her response to the FORM dated October 17, 2016, Applicant stated “I was 
married when all of the bankruptcies took place and I do take responsibility of being 
married to someone who poorly managed our finances and did not keep his word.” The 
delinquent debts were joint debts and both spouses were equally responsible for them. 
Applicant attached a current Equifax credit report and an above average credit score of 
744. She did not produce any divorce decree or legal agreement to show that the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR were her ex-husband’s responsibility. Concerning 
SOR 1.c, Applicant said that “this is another scenario that my husband asked me to put 
a credit card, car etc. in his name and he would pay for it…however, please see my 
recent credit report…as this has been removed from my credit report and is not 
considered a debt. In lieu of this fact, I am disputing this item as irrelevant to my case.” 
Yet, it is relevant which is precisely why the SOR was issued. Applicant submitted no 
letter to the creditor disputing this debt, or any others.  
 
In her response to the FORM, Applicant also stated “I can easily pay off all the 
medical bills. I was told by Lexington Law to wait until the dispute is resolved then if I 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s June 2, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
 
3 
 
 
choose to pay for them then I could pay them off. That was a suggestion from the 
paralegal to myself.” Applicant hired Lexington Law to assist her in improving her credit 
score. It is unclear whether Lexington Law took any measures to address the delinquent 
debts specifically alleged in the SOR on her behalf.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the former adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective 
on September 1, 2006. However, new AGs were promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017, and this decision 
is based on the new AGs.3 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
3 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
5 
 
 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by her credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b) and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.4 Applicant has not met that burden. None of the delinquent debts have been 
addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured a divorce and a downturn in the economy. Arguably, these 
conditions were beyond her control. She has produced no relevant or responsive 
documentation, either with her Answer to the SOR, or in response to the FORM. She 
has not demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are 
under control, and that her debts were incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur.  
 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and SOR 
list four delinquent debts totaling $12,683. Applicant did not provide enough details with 
documentary corroboration about what she did to address her SOR debts. She did not 
provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor 
proving that she paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;5 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating she did not believe she was responsible for the debts and why she held such 
a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) 
other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented proof to substantiate the 
existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was crucial for her 
to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in the 
SOR. (FORM at 2) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. She did not describe financial counseling or provide 
her budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and 
detailed explanations of the causes for her financial problems and other mitigating 
information. The FORM informed Applicant that she had 30 days from the receipt of the 
FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections 
or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative 
Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM 
at 2) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
5 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has gone through a divorce, and 
made some efforts to pay her bills and improve her credit since that divorce. Most 
important, Applicant has not addressed the specific allegations in the SOR. Instead, she 
persists with her erroneous belief that her ex-husband is solely responsible for their joint 
debts. She hasn’t met her burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
