 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02816 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas R. Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On October 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to her, under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated September 2, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 6, 2015. On November 23, 2015, she 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on January 21, 
2016. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 24, 2016, and 
reassigned to me on June 6, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 28, 2016. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 11, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4 were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. Applicant did not submit any exhibits. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on July 25, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant 
to supplement it. She failed to take advantage of that opportunity and did not submit any 
documents. The record closed on August 8, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five (¶¶ 1.a., and 1.c. through 1.f.)  
of the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations. Applicant’s admissions 
and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a 
supply specialist with the company since June 2016, having served as a material 
coordinator with another federal contractor from October 2010 until May 2016. She is a 
May 1979 high school graduate. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in April 1980, 
switched over to the U.S. Naval Reserve in June 1985, went back to the U.S. Navy in 
November 1986, and retired honorably as an E-6 in October 2002. Because she failed to 
submit records associated with her military service, no information regarding her military 
awards and decorations was developed. She held a confidential security clearance 
associated with her military service. Applicant was married to her first husband in March 
1980 and divorced in November 1989. She married a second time in December 1989. 
Applicant has three children (a daughter born in 1983 and two sons born in 1988 and 
1994), as well as a step-son (born in 1982). 
 
  
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations2 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until 1998 or 1999. 
Applicant’s history of timely filing federal income tax returns is haphazard at best. In 1998 
or 1999, for reasons not recalled, other than she was scared, she failed to timely file her 
federal income returns or pay her owed income taxes. That practice continued until 2001. 
She claimed that all income tax returns were filed in 2002, and that she paid the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) all of her delinquent taxes.  She failed to timely file her federal 
income tax return for the tax year 2002, but finally did so in about 2004. She did not pay 
her delinquent income taxes for that year. In 2008, the IRS contacted Applicant about her 
delinquent income taxes, estimated at that point to be between $25,000 and $30,000. A 
tax lien was filed against her, and $600 to $800 per month was garnished from her 
paycheck. After about ten months, the lien was removed.  
Applicant did not recall if she timely filed her federal income tax return for the tax 
year 2009, but she acknowledged that she failed to timely file the returns for 2010 and 
2011. Because she was afraid of making a mistake on her returns, she decided not to file 
her income tax returns. In 2012, Applicant engaged the professional services of a tax 
preparer. Applicant contended that her delinquent federal income tax returns going back 
to 2002 were then filed, and that she entered into an installment agreement with the IRS 
to have a monthly payment of $200 withdrawn from her paycheck. She also contended 
that the payments were increased to $400 in January 2013. In November 2013, Applicant 
estimated she still owed the IRS $20,000 in delinquent income taxes. Applicant failed to 
submit any documentation to support her contentions that her federal income tax returns 
were filed; that she had hired a professional income tax preparer; that she had entered 
into an installment agreement with the IRS; or that any delinquent taxes had been paid. 
In addition to her federal income tax difficulties, in about 2012 or 2013, Applicant 
began experiencing other financial problems. She claimed that over the next few years, 
she provided unspecified financial support for her mother and paid for her daughter’s 
wedding. She also periodically assists her son and grandchildren. In addition, because of 
her son’s previous actions in trashing a vacant residence next to the family home, 
Applicant purportedly had to pay $30,000 in restitution. Also, she noted that there were 
Christmas expenditures. Those factors created financial discomfort for her as she was 
unable to maintain all of her accounts in a current status. With insufficient funds to do so, 
Applicant had to prioritize her financial obligations, leaving some bills unpaid. As a result, 
accounts became delinquent, were placed for collection, and some cases, were charged 
off. Applicant acknowledged that, because of her family obligations, she was remiss in 
giving her financial situation her full attention. 
In addition to the delinquent income taxes, the SOR identified four purportedly 
delinquent debts that had been placed for collection or charged off, as generally reflected 
                                                          
2 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 19, 2014); GE 2 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated October 20, 2015); GE 1, supra note 1; GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 12, 
2014).  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
by the September 2014 credit report or the October 2015 credit report. Those debts, 
including the income taxes, totaling approximately $28,639, and their respective current 
status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and 
Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described below:  
There is a debt to the federal Government in the amount of $25,737.63 for 
delinquent taxes for the tax years 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2013, that Applicant 
contends she is in the process of paying off at the rate of $400 per month (SOR ¶ 1.a.). 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation, such as receipts and cancelled checks, to 
support her contentions that she had entered into an installment agreement with the IRS, 
or that any delinquent taxes had been paid. In the absence of such documentation, the 
account has not been resolved. 
There is a bank credit card with an unpaid balance of $782 that was placed for 
collection when Applicant was unable to make monthly payments for the laptop and video 
games she had previously purchased (SOR ¶ 1.c.).3 In her interview conducted by an 
investigator with the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in November 2014, 
Applicant stated she would contact the collection agent to make payment arrangements.4 
In her November 2015 Answer to the SOR – one year later –   she said she was in the 
process of contacting the collection agent. During her hearing, Applicant contended that 
the account had been paid off in May or June 2016.5  Although she said she would do so, 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation, such as a receipt or cancelled check, to 
support her contentions that the account had been paid off. In the absence of such 
documentation, the account has not been resolved. 
There is a medical account with an unpaid balance of $75 that was placed for 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.d.).6 In November 2014, Applicant stated she would contact the 
collection agent to make payment arrangements if the account is her account.7 In her 
November 2015 Answer to the SOR, she said she was in the process of contacting the 
collection agent. During her hearing, Applicant stated that she thought she had paid the 
account, but acknowledged that the account had not yet been paid off.8  The account has 
not been resolved. 
There is a charge account with a clothing store (where Applicant purchased some 
bridal clothing) with a credit limit of $1,500 and an unpaid balance of $1,235 that was 
placed for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.e.).9 In her November 2015 Answer to the 
                                                          
3 GE 3, supra note 2, at 11; GE 2, supra note 2, at 2; GE 4, supra note 2, at 5-6. 
 
4 GE 4, supra note 2, at 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 34. 
 
6 GE 3, supra note 2, at 11; GE 2, supra note 2, at 2; GE 4, supra note 2, at 5-6. 
 
7 GE 4, supra note 2, at 6. 
 
8 Tr. at 35. 
 
9 GE 3, supra note 2, at 8; GE 2, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
SOR, she said she was in the process of contacting the collection agent. During her 
hearing, Applicant contended that she had been making payments by automatic 
withdrawal from her salary for the last three or four months before the hearing, and that 
she had only one more payment due.10  Although she said she would do so, Applicant 
failed to submit any documentation, such as receipts or an agreement, to support her 
contentions that payments were being made. In the absence of such documentation, the 
account has not been resolved. 
There is a charge account with a clothing store with a credit limit of $400 that was 
placed for collection and charged off in the amount of $809 (SOR ¶ 1.f.).11 In November 
2014, Applicant stated that she had made some $50 payments in an effort to settle the 
account.12 However, in her November 2015 Answer to the SOR, she said she was in the 
process of contacting the collection agent. During her hearing, Applicant acknowledged 
that she had not yet addressed the account.13  The account has not been resolved. 
Applicant contends that she has sufficient funds available to pay all of her debts.14 
Although she failed to submit a Personal Financial Statement, she did estimate the 
essential aspects of such a document. She claimed that the combined family monthly 
income, including military retirements and current salaries for both Applicant and her 
husband, is about $6,000. After paying the monthly bills, she claimed to have a remainder 
of over $1,000. She offered no excuse for failing to pay off her delinquent debts with her 
monthly remainder. She said she has $6,000 in a savings account, $600 in a checking 
account, and $33,000 in a 401(k) retirement account.15 Although she used to keep a 
budget for awhile, Applicant acknowledged that she no longer does so.16  
In the absence of documentary evidence to the contrary, I must conclude that 
Applicant has made minimal efforts to resolve her delinquent accounts. Applicant has 
generally removed herself from the monthly bill-paying budget process, allowing new 
“family” expenditures to take priority over her long-standing delinquent tax debts to the 
Federal Government and delinquent accounts to various vendors who provided her with 
services and merchandise. Applicant never received any financial counseling. In the 
absence of documentation pertaining to the accounts and Applicant’s current financial 
situation, it remains unclear if Applicant’s financial status has improved, or if they are 
under control. 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 35-36. 
 
11 GE 3, supra note 2, at 7; GE 2, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
12 GE 4, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
13 Tr. at 36. 
 
14 Tr. at 50. 
 
15 Tr. at 36-38. 
 
16 Tr. at 39-40. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Policies 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”17 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”18   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”19 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.20  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
18 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
19 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(g), security concerns may be raised when there is a 
“failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing of the same.” Applicant’s financial problems initially arose in 1998 or 
1999, and increased during the ensuing years. Federal income tax returns were not timely 
filed for various tax years between 1998 and 2013. In addition, in about 2012 or 2013, 
accounts became delinquent. Some accounts were charged off. Tax liens were filed in 
2008. Because of the lack of documentation to support her contentions that income tax 
                                                          
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
22 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
returns, though late, were eventually filed, or that unpaid taxes and other delinquent 
accounts have been paid or are in the process of being paid, there is little persuasive 
evidence that her delinquencies have been resolved or are in the process of being 
resolved. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG 
¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”23  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant’s financial problems 
were initially associated with her failure to timely file federal income tax returns for the tax 
years 1998 or 1999 because she was scared and for other reasons she could not recall. 
Over the ensuing years, other tax returns were not timely filed. Although the SOR alleged 
that Applicant failed to timely file her federal income tax return for the tax year 2004, there 
is no evidence of such a failure, and there is also no evidence that the tax return for that 
tax year was actually filed. Applicant initially could not recall timely filing the federal 
income tax return for 2009, but she also admitted her failure. Applicant contended she 
eventually filed her delinquent tax returns, but she offered no documentary evidence to 
support her contentions. In 2012 or 2013, rather than addressing her delinquent debts, 
Applicant purportedly provided financial support for her mother, her daughter, her son, 
and her grandchildren. Christmas expenditures also took priority over delinquent 
accounts and taxes. Although she contended that most of her delinquent accounts were 
either in repayment plans, being paid, or were paid off, she failed to submit any 
documentation to support her contentions. 
 
                                                          
23 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
The record establishes that Applicant failed to timely file her federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2013. The DOHA Appeal Board 
has commented:24 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we 
have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not directed at collecting 
debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By 
the same token, neither is it directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax 
returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her 
legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See 
Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 
183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
Applicant has procrastinated over an extensive multi-year period to resolve her 
delinquent debts. She offered no documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve 
any of her accounts. There are no receipts, cancelled checks, account records, etc., to 
support her contentions. There is no evidence that Applicant took any positive action to 
resolve her accounts either before or since her November 2014 OPM interview. There is 
no documentary evidence of a budget, financial counseling, or that her finances are under 
control. There is simply her verbal estimate that after she pays her bills, she has a monthly 
remainder in excess of $1,000. In failing to timely file her various federal income tax 
returns and resolve her long-standing delinquent debts, Applicant appears to have acted 
imprudently and irresponsibly. Applicant’s actions, or inactions, under the circumstances 
confronting him, continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.25 
 
  
                                                          
 
24 ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). See ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 
25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)). ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 18, 2015). The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has purportedly corrected [the 
applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, 
does not preclude careful consideration of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding prior 
behavior evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax returns. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no harm, no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course 
of conduct and employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis as inadequate to support approval of access to classified 
information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns after receipt of the SOR).   
 
25 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.26       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, mishandling protected 
information, or substance abuse. She is an honorably retired former member of the U.S. 
Navy. She candidly acknowledged having some financial difficulties when she completed 
his e-QIP. She is a loving, caring daughter, mother, and grandmother. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. As noted above, Applicant’s explanation for her long-standing failure to 
comply with the law related to the timely filing of her federal income tax returns is simply 
too simplistic. Being scared of making mistakes, without more extensive explanations, is 
insufficient. Her moment of truth was when she said she was remiss in not giving her 
debts her full attention because of her family obligations. Applicant prioritized her debts 
and more recent accounts, and she simply chose to spend her available funds for family 
purposes, basically to the exclusion of her delinquent debts and taxes. She offered no 
meaningful explanations for her continuous failures to timely file her federal income tax 
returns, pay her taxes, or maintain her accounts in a current status. Based on the 
evidence presented, Applicant failed to take any positive action to resolve her accounts. 
There is no evidence of a budget, financial counseling, or that her finances are under 
control.  
 
                                                          
26 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 27 
 
In light of Applicant’s failure to submit documentation in support of her claimed 
actions, Applicant has demonstrated an essentially non-existent track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s security worthiness. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
amended, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:    Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
27 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
