 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04750 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 17, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 29, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 6, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for January 25, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4, which were admitted 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented two packets 
of documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B, and admitted 
without objection. In light of repeated requests made by Applicant, the record was left 
open until April 24, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. Pursuant to this 
request, AppXs C~F were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (TR) on February 3, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the 
facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan, identified as 
GX 4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f., and 1.h. He denied 
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a.~1.d., and 1.g. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in 
Afghanistan, immigrated to the United States in 2009, and has been a U.S., citizen 
since 2014. (TR at page 17 line 19 to page 25 line 16.) He has been employed with the 
defense contractor as an interpreter since 2009, much of that time working with U.S. 
forces on combat patrols. (Id.) He is married and his spouse has been approved for 
immigration to the United States, as will be discussed in conjunction with ¶¶ 1.e. and 
1.g., below. 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. Applicant’s 44-year-old mother is a citizen and, at present, a resident of 
Afghanistan. (TR at page 25 line 1 to page 29 line 19, and at page 33 lines 17~24.) She 
is a “housewife,” has been granted a visa to immigrate to the United States, and has no 
knowledge that Applicant works as an interpreter. (Id., TR at page 47 lines 4~21, and 
AppX F at page 2.) Her immigration status is evidenced by a photo copy of his mother’s 
visa. (AppX F at page 2.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s 51-year-old father is a citizen of Afghanistan, but resides in the 
United States. (TR at page 29 line 20 to page 32 line 14, and AppX A at page 2.)   He is 
“a semi-truck driver,” as evidenced by a photo copy of his “Commercial Driver License,” 
and his “Permanent Resident” status is evidence by a photo copy of his U.S. 
Government identification card. (AppX A at page 2.) 
 
 
3 
 
 1.c. Applicant has four Afghan sisters, ages 25, 23, 20, and 12. (TR at page 32 
line 15 to page 35 line 23.)  Of the three adult sisters, one lives in Italy, and the other 
two sisters are housewives, married to doctors, and live in Afghanistan. (Id.) None of 
Applicant’s sisters have any connection to the Afghan government, and they have no 
knowledge that Applicant works as an interpreter. (TR at page 32 line 15 to page 35 line 
23, and at page 47 lines 4~21.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant has three Afghan brothers, ages 16, 14, and 6. (TR at page 36 line 
7 to page 37 line 5.) These minor brothers, and his 12 year old sister noted above, are 
being sponsored for immigrant status to the United States, by Applicant’s permanent-
resident father. (Id.) They have no knowledge that Applicant works as an interpreter. 
(TR at page 47 lines 4~21.) 
 
 1.e. and 1.g. Applicant’s Afghan “fiancée” and “friend” are one and the same 
person. (Tr at page 37 line 25 to page 41 line 6, and at page 43 lines 4~20.)  Applicant 
and his fiancée are now married. His wife has been granted a visa to immigrate to the 
United States, and has no knowledge that Applicant works as an interpreter. (Id., TR at 
page 47 lines 4~21, and AppX F at page 1.) Her immigration status is evidenced by a 
photo copy of his wife’s visa. (AppX F at page 1.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant’s friend is a citizen and resident of the United States. (TR at page 
41 line 19 to page 43 line 3.)  This is evidenced by a photo copy of his U.S. passport. 
(AppX A at page 2.) 
 
 1.h. Applicant admits sending, in the past, $1,000 each month to support his 
mother and four minor siblings. (TR at page 43 line 24 to page 47 line 3.) Once they 
immigrate to the United States, he will cease this support. (Id.) Applicant has $50,000 in 
U.S. savings, and has been approved for a $270,000 loan for a house valued at 
$300,000. (TR at page 43 line 24 to page 47 line 3, and AppX D at page 5.) The home 
loan is evidenced by a funding statement from Applicant’s mortgage company. (AppX D 
at page 5.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Afghanistan: 
 
 A U.S. State Department Travel Warning vis-à-vis Afghanistan remains in effect. 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks and the Islamic State are active 
throughout the country. As such, the situation in Afghanistan remains precarious.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
5 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s mother and his wife are still Afghan citizens, and he has six Afghan 
siblings who still reside in Afghanistan. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest 
 
 Applicant’s mother and wife are in route to the United States, pursuant to U.S. 
immigration visas. His four minor siblings will soon follow, as they are being sponsored 
by their permanent resident father.  The two remaining Afghan sisters are married 
 
6 
 
house wives. Their husbands are doctors, and they have no connection to the Afghan 
government.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has a distinguished history of 
working with the U.S. forces in Afghanistan as an interpreter. This is evidenced by a 
plethora of awards and letters of recommendation from U.S. Armed Forces members 
who served with Applicant in Afghanistan. (AppXs B and C.).  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.h.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
