KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant argues that the Judge improperly focused on his wife’s contacts in China
rather than his foreign contacts. Applicant’s argument is unpersuasive. As a matter of common
sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant has ties of
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of his or her spouse. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-03801.a1
DATE: 07/28/2017
DATE: July 28, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-03801
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 24, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On April 19, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 43 years old, has worked for Federal contractors since 2010.  He has held
a security clearance since 2011.  He was born in China.  His family moved to the United States while
he was in his teens.  He attended high school and college in the United States.  He became a U.S.
citizen in 2002.   
Applicant’s father was a professor who became a U.S. citizen in 2002 and passed away
before the hearing.  His mother is a permanent resident alien in the United States, but has not applied
for U.S. citizenship because of her language proficiency.  His brother also has permanent resident
alien status, owns a restaurant, is married to a Chinese woman, and has a family.   
Applicant first met his wife in China in 2010.  In 2012, she came to the United States on a
student visa and later completed her PhD.  They married in 2013 and have a child.  She applied for
permanent resident alien status a week before Applicant’s security clearance hearing.  Her parents,
siblings, and relatives are residents and citizens of China.  About once a month, she maintains
contact with her relatives in China.  Applicant claims his last contact with his parents-in-law was
in 2014, but earlier had daily contact with them.   
In his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed friends and relatives in
China with whom he maintained frequent contact.  At the hearing, he claimed he no longer
communicates with them.  He has no financial or property interests in China.  He purchased two
homes in the United States that have a total value of about $850,000, and has bank and retirement
accounts containing about $260,000.  His and his wife’s annual income is about $190,000. 
China is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information.  China’s
intelligence services and private Chinese entities frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or
persons with family ties to China who have insider access to corporate secrets.  China has conducted
large-scale cyber espionage against the United States and is using its computer network exploitation
capability to support intelligence collection against U.S. Government diplomatic, economic, and
defense entities.  China is an authoritarian state with a wide variety of human rights violations. 
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s mother, brother, and wife are Chinese citizens residing in the United States.  He
has in-laws and friends who are citizens and residents of China.  He claims that he no longer
maintains contact with his extended family or friends in China because he does not want to raise
security concerns.  His wife maintains monthly contact with her parents and siblings in China. 
China’s history of conducting espionage against the United States places a heavy burden of proof
on Applicant, citing ISCR Case No. 12-04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013).  Decision at 8.
Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is little likelihood his family in China
could create a risk of foreign exploitation.  His and his wife’s connections to China are significant
and outweigh his connections to the United States.  The weight of the evidence supports denial of
access to classified information, and the security concerns under Guideline B were not mitigated.
Discussion
Applicant contends the Government did not prove the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c that he had
close and continuing contacts with foreign nationals who are citizens and residents of China.  He
claims he admitted to having “contact with individuals ‘only during the holiday’” and has not
communicated with any foreign “friends or associates since 2014 and at best communicated with
those individuals annually.”  Appeal Brief at 6-7.  We note, however, that  Applicant responded
“Yes” to the question in his security clearance application that asked whether he had “close and/or
continuing contact with a foreign national within the last seven (7) years with whom [he] or [his]
spouse . . . are bound by affection, influence, common interest, and/or obligation” and then
proceeded to list four individuals with whom he had such a relationship.  Government Exhibit 1. 
After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings are based on substantial
evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant argues that the Judge improperly focused on his wife’s contacts in China rather
than his foreign contacts.  Specifically he states:
Although, the contact of the [Applicant’s] wife with her parents in China is
minimally relevant, it is inappropriate and unnatural to attempt to superimpose the
actions of his wife onto him in order to find him unsuitable to hold a security
clearance, which is exactly what [the Judge] does in his decision.1
Applicant’s argument is unpersuasive.  As a matter of common sense and human experience, there
is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate
family members of his or her spouse.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-26176 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14,
2005).  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s foreign contacts, including his in-laws in China,
raised security concerns under Guideline B is sustainable in light of the record evidence as a whole. 
  
Applicant raises other arguments challenging the Judge’s adverse decision.  For example,
he  contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence and argues his foreign contacts were
so causal or infrequent to not raise security concerns.  His arguments, however, are neither enough
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient to show
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01717 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2017).   We give due consideration to the
Hearing Office cases that Applicant has cited, but they are neither binding precedent on the Appeal
Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id.  Additionally, we find no basis for
concluding the Judge erred in his whole-person analysis.
1  Appeal Brief at 10.  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
