 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05134 
  ) 
Applicant for security clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
alcohol consumption and financial considerations. National security eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On February 19, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January  17, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, 
and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) in effect on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and became effective 
that day. I considered both sets of guidelines in reaching this decision, and it would be 
the same under either set.  
 
On February 18, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.) On May 24, 
2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
seven Items, and mailed it to Applicant on May 27, 2016. He received the FORM on June 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
20, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant did not submit any additional documents or file objections to the 
Government’s evidence; hence, Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence. On May 4, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.      
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Based on Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Department Counsel moved to amend 
allegation 2.a, by striking the word Alabama, and replacing it with the word Georgia. 
Applicant did not file an objection to the motion. The Department’s motion is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated into 
these findings.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old and unmarried. He earned an associate’s degree in 2011. 
He started working for a defense contractor in 2014. Prior to this position, he experienced 
periods of unemployment and worked for private companies. (Item 4.)  
 
Applicant admitted that he consumed alcohol at times to excess and to the point 
of intoxication between 1999 and 2014. That history of consuming alcohol includes five 
arrests and convictions for driving under the influence (DUI) in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2010, 
and 2012. In 2002, he was arrested for driving with a suspended/revoked license and 
willful obstruction of a police officer.1 (Item 3.) All crimes were misdemeanors. As a 
consequence, he has been placed on probation at least four times for periods of a year; 
placed in jail; ordered to perform community service; fined; and had his driver’s licenses 
suspended several times. (Item 6.) Applicant did not submit evidence of alcohol abuse 
treatment or other evidence addressing his alcohol problems and rehabilitation.  
 
When he completed “Section 26: Financial” in his 2015 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed 
that he had not filed federal or state taxes for 2013. He said he had not paid the taxes 
because he was the victim of theft and did not have enough money when the taxes were 
due. (Item 1.) He admitted that he has also not filed or paid federal or state taxes for 2012. 
(Item 3.)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AGs. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny 
of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge 
                                            
1 Applicant’s driver’s license was suspended as a consequence of a previous DUI. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. See Executive 
Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information.) 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol  
 
  AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. They include: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
Applicant has a long history of consuming alcohol to excess, which includes five 
arrests and convictions for DUI. The evidence raised the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate those security concerns.  They 
include: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant did not produce evidence to establish mitigation under any of the above 
conditions. His last DUI arrest occurred in 2012. Given his 15-year history of abusing 
alcohol and convictions for DUIs, insufficient time passed to conclude similar events will 
not recur. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant acknowledged 
his problems or established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence. AG ¶ 23(b) 
does not apply. Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in any form of 
treatment or successfully completed a program. AG ¶ 23(c) and AG ¶ 23(d) do not apply. 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets out the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant acknowledged that he failed to file federal and state income tax returns 
for 2012 and 2013. He did not present any evidence that he has filed the returns . He also 
has not paid taxes for either year. The evidence raised the above disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides a condition that could mitigate those security concerns: 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
When he completed his e-QIP, Applicant’s 2012 tax returns were almost three 
years overdue. By the time he answered the SOR they were almost four years late. His 
2013 returns were about two years late when he submitted the e-QIP, and three years 
late when he answered the SOR. He did not provide evidence that he filed the returns, 
contacted the taxing authorities, established a payment plan, or is in compliance with any 
plan. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a) requires an administrative judge to evaluate an applicant’s national 
security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person concept. Under AG ¶ 2(c) the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must include 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. The administrative judge should also consider the 
following nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 40-year-old man, 
who has worked for a defense contractor since 2014. He has a long history of alcohol 
problems, including arrests and convictions. Other than the passage of four years from 
the date of his last arrest for a DUI, he has provided minimal evidence of mitigation 
pertinent to that history. Consequently, there is insufficient evidence from which to 
conclude similar problem will not recur. Additionally, he failed to file federal and state tax 
returns and pay taxes for 2012 and 2013, despite having knowledge of DoD’s concerns. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves serious doubts as to Applicant’s present national 
security eligibility. Applicant did not mitigate the alcohol consumption or financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
          Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
