 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-08423 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken 
under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 29, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 25, 2016. The Government withdrew the personal conduct 
allegation. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant received the 
FORM on September 2, 2016. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2017.  
 
The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted into 
evidence. Other than her Answer to the SOR, admitted into evidence as Item 2, 
Applicant failed to submit any additional documentation.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the financial considerations 
allegations.  
 
Applicant is 32 years old. She married in 2007, divorced in 2009, married again 
in 2012, divorced in 2015.  As of July 2016, she had recently married and did not have 
any children.2  
 
 Applicant attended community college from October 2010 to December 2010 and 
August 2012 to December 2012, and attended university online from 2007 to at least 
May 2015. She received her certified nursing assistant certification in December 2010. 
She worked as a self-employed daycare provider between February 2007 and April 
2010, was unemployed from December 2012 to March 2013, and has worked for her 
current employer since January 2015.3 
   
 The SOR alleges two judgments totaling $1,291, three delinquent student loans 
totaling $13,993, and 16 delinquent consumer and medical accounts totaling $21,842. 
The debts are established by Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports from 
February 2015, April 2016, and July 2016.4  
 
 Applicant took out student loans to pay for college but was unable to repay them 
because of a lack of income. She had difficulty paying her bills after her first divorce in 
March 2009. She was unemployed from December 2012 to March 2013 because she 
had trouble finding a job after she moved from one state to another state. Some of her 
medical bills stem from surgeries she had between 2013 and 2014, which she believed 
would be covered by her insurance as a result of hardship papers she had filed. After 
she separated from her second husband in April 2014, she had difficulty paying bills on 
                                                          
2 Items 2-4. 
 
3 Items 2-4. 
 
4 Items 1-6. 
 
3 
 
 
her own. She experienced a decrease in income from what she earned at her prior job 
when she obtained her current job in January 2016. She has been in a better position to 
start resolving her delinquent debts since her marriage in July 2016.5  
 
 Applicant stated that she is investigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.j, 
and she plans to resolve them if they are her debts. She stated that she has contacted 
her medical creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.f to 1.i, 1.l, 1.n, 1.p, and 1.q, as well as the creditors 
for SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c to 1.e, 1.m and 1.u, and is attempting to pay or set up payment 
plans for these debts. She stated that she is paying $168 biweekly towards her student 
loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.r to 1.t, and she is also paying the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.o. She 
stated that she made arrangements to pay SOR ¶ 1.k with a 401k withdrawal. While 
Applicant provided her July 2016 credit report to show that she has 16 accounts in good 
standing, she has not provided corroborating evidence of actions she may have taken to 
resolve any of the SOR debts. There is no evidence that Applicant has received credit 
counseling.6   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
                                                          
5 Items 2-4. 
 
6 Items 2-4. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to financial 
considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel [trustworthiness] concern such as excessive 
gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse 
or dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to 
generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of 
income is also a [trustworthiness] concern insofar as it may result from 
criminal activity, including espionage. 
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable to pay her financial 
obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 and considered 
the following relevant: 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s lack of income, divorces, unemployment, and medical expenses were 
beyond her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
    Applicant has not provided evidence of actions she may have taken to resolve 
any of the SOR debts. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the 
future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). I am unable to find that 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, made a good-faith effort to pay 
her debts, or has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of some of her medical 
debts and provided documented proof or evidence of actions to resolve them. Her 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(d), and 20(e) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the factors that led to Applicant’s financial difficulties. However, the 
limited information in the record has not convinced me Applicant has a viable plan to 
address her finances.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:    Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    WITHDRAWN 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
