 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04658 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 18, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations, which include an unresolved mortgage deficiency and unpaid 
student loans. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On February 26, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the previous 
 
2 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006. This decision applies the 
new AG that became effective on June 8, 2017.1  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 14, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to another administrative judge 
on July 15, 2016, and re-assigned it to me on September 29, 2016. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on December 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 18, 
2017. The hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into evidence. Applicant testified, called one 
witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 4 into evidence. All exhibits 
were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2017. The record remained open until February 13, 
2017, to give Applicant an opportunity to provide additional exhibits. Applicant 
timely submitted four exhibits, which I marked as AE 5, AE 6, AE 7 and AE 8, and 
admitted into evidence without objections from Department Counsel.   
      
     Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to strike the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.j in its entirety. Applicant had no objection and the allegation is 
stricken. (Tr. 8-9) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR with explanations. Her admissions 
are incorporated into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 39 years old and divorced since 2004, after four year of marriage to 
her husband. She has a 17-year-old son from that marriage. Applicant earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2010 and a master’s degree in 2013. (Tr. 25.) She worked for federal 
contractors from June 2007 to March 2013, at which time she was laid off from a position 
that paid $89,000 annually. She then worked at low paying jobs until 2014. (Tr. 34-36.) In 
January 2015, she was laid off for several months after she had surgery. (Tr. 27.) She 
then worked full-time for an employer for some months and subsequently in a part-time 
position. Since November 2016, she has worked for her current employer. (Tr. 35.) She 
has held security clearances during most of her employment years. (Tr. 27, 31; GE 6; 
Answer.) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began after her divorce. She became responsible 
for certain joint marital debts. She did not have enough money to pay the mortgage on 
the house she purchased in 2007 for $176,000, and her living expenses, after moving to 
another state for employment. Subsequently, she also experienced periods of 
                                                          
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
Although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG, my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
unemployment and underemployment, during which time she used her savings of 
$14,000 to pay bills. She eventually extinguished those savings and her unemployment 
benefits. (Tr. 32-33, 38; Answer.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2014, April 2015, and January 
2017, the amended SOR alleged 11 debts, which became delinquent between 2011 and 
2015, and totaled over $45,000. It also alleged a 2005 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (GE 2, GE 
3, GE 4.) The status of each allegation is as follows: 
 
1. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The $37,763 past-due balance relates to Applicant’s previous 
mortgage on the house she purchased. When she moved to a new state in 2009, she 
attempted to sell it, but was unsuccessful. She was unable to pay the mortgage on that 
property and maintain living expenses in the state where she moved. In 2012, the 
mortgager foreclosed on the loan. She said she received a statement from the mortgagor 
after the foreclosure stating that she had a zero balance. She was unaware of the alleged 
deficiency until this investigation began. She agreed to contact the bank and obtain 
documentation of the zero balance. (Tr. 42-44.) She did not submit any information post-
hearing related to the foreclosure. This debt is unresolved. 
 
2. (SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant said the delinquent student loan, which has a $1,295 
payment due, is deferred. She agreed to provide proof of its deferment. On February 7, 
2017, she submitted her application to the federal education loan program for the 
consolidation of her loans and a payment plan. There is no evidence she received 
approval for her application, that the loans are to be consolidated, or any suggested 
repayment amount. (Tr. 47; AE 7.) This debt is unresolved. 
 
3. (SOR ¶ 1.c) The $2,695 retail debt was charged off. Applicant has been making 
payments on the debt and the balance is $1,697. (Tr. 47-49; AE 2, AE 8.) This debt is 
being resolved.  
 
4. (SOR ¶ 1.d) Applicant settled the $1,173 credit card debt for $554. She paid it. 
(Tr. 49-50; AE 2, AE 4.) This debt is resolved.  
 
5. (SOR ¶ 1.e) The $776 debt is owed for a delinquent student loan that became 
delinquent in 2014. (Tr. 56-57.) It is unresolved. 
 
6. (SOR ¶ 1.f) The $598 debt is owed for a delinquent student loan that became 
delinquent in 2014. (Tr. 56-57.) It is unresolved. 
 
7. (SOR ¶ 1.g) The $440 debt is owed to a credit card company. She made two 
payments to the company that paid off the debt. (Tr. 51-53; AE 2, AE 3.) It is resolved. 
 
8. (SOR ¶ 1.h) The $113 medical debt is an unpaid medical bill from 2013. (Tr. 44, 
55, 63.) It is unresolved. 
 
9. (SOR ¶ 1.i) Applicant was unfamiliar with the $182 credit card debt. (Tr. 53-54.) 
It is unresolved. 
 
4 
 
 
10. (SOR ¶ 1.j) This allegation was stricken. 
 
11. (SOR ¶ 1.k) The $152 debt is owed for a student loan that became delinquent 
in 2014. Applicant said the loan is in a deferred status, but did not provide proof. (Tr. 56-
58.) It is unresolved. 
 
12. (SOR ¶ 1.l) The $135 debt is owed for a student loan that became delinquent 
in 2014. Applicant said the loan is in a deferred status, but did not provide proof. (Tr. 56-
58.) It is unresolved. 
 
13. (SOR ¶ 1.m) In May 2005 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy after her 
divorce. At the time she had assets of $18,000 and liabilities of $64,000, which included 
unpaid student loans. In August 2005, the court entered a discharge order for $18,000 of 
debts. (Tr. 69; GE 5.) 
 
Applicant has borrowed about $70,000 for student loans. She made payments on 
them until she was laid off in 2013. (Tr. 59, 68.) According to the January 2017 CBR, two 
more retail accounts were reported as delinquent. They total about $2,800. (Tr. 54-55; 
GE 4.) Since gaining full-time employment several months ago, she is earning about 
$50,000. She has not participated in credit or financial counseling. (Tr. 66.) She does not 
use credit cards. (Tr. 70.) She did not submit a written budget. She is trying to resolve the 
high-interest debts before focusing on other debts. (Tr. 72.) 
 
A witness testified on behalf of Applicant. She has known Applicant for about 10 
to 12 years. She is familiar with Applicant’s financial difficulties and her year of 
unemployment from 2013 to 2014. The witness loaned Applicant $1,000 to help her pay 
expenses. During that time, she did not observe Applicant engaging in frivolous spending. 
She said Applicant responsibly repaid the loan in installments. (Tr. 16-23.) 
 
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from her former husband. He said 
she is responsible, honest, and dedicated to her work. (AE 5.)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AGs. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny 
of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
5 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Finally, as 
emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination under this order 
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also 
Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets out the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
6 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy delinquent debts that 
began accumulating in 2013 and continue to be delinquent today. Some remain 
unresolved. The evidence raised the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could mitigate the security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Some of Applicant’s financial problems have been ongoing since 2013. The 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). There is evidence to establish 
partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Many of Applicant’s financial problems resulted from 
a long period of unemployment, periods of underemployment, and as the consequence 
of a divorce in 2004. Those were circumstances beyond her control. She provided some 
evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances in that she exhausted her 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
savings trying to pay bills while she was unemployed. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) because she has not participated in credit counseling or 
provided a budget from which to determine that her financial problems are under control.  
 
Applicant made good-faith efforts to pay and resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.d, and 1.g, which established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) for them. She did not 
provide evidence that the largest debt, a $37,763 mortgage deficiency, is resolved or 
being resolved. Although she said three student loans are deferred, she did not submit 
verification of that assertion.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
The whole-person concept requires the administrative judge to evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to 
grant national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The administrative 
judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 39-year-old 
educated and intelligent woman. Her divorce in 2004 and subsequent periods of 
unemployment and underemployment negatively affected her ability to manage financial 
obligations. Although she has resolved some delinquent debts, she did not provide 
credible evidence that she does not have an outstanding mortgage debt or that her 
students loans are in a deferred status at this time. She applied for a hardship deferment 
after the hearing for the delinquent student loans. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all relevant facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant did not mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves some 
doubt as to Applicant’s present national security eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
8 
 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:                       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.j:           Stricken 
 
Subparagraphs 1.k through 1.m:                Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
 
