1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 15-07010 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Between 2009 and 2012, Applicant incurred more than $100,000 of delinquent debt. 
Although she is paying some through a garnishment, she has not addressed the  
overwhelming majority of the debt. Under these circumstances, Applicant has not mitigated 
the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue security 
clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On May 27, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting all of them, 
and requesting a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on February 13, 2017. On 
March 16, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for April 7, 2017. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. I received three Government exhibits (GE 1 – 3), nine exhibits from Applicant 
(AE A – AE I), and I considered Applicant’s testimony, together with three character 
witnesses. At the close of the hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, she submitted three 
additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not object, and I incorporated them into the 
record as AE J through AE L. The transcript was received on April 17, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old single woman. She earned a bachelor’s deree in business 
administration in 1994 and a bachelor’s degree in information technology in 2010. Since 
2007, she has worked for a defense contractor as a network administrator. Applicant is 
highly respected on the job. According to an upper-level supervisor, she is one of the best 
and most knowledgeable employees in the organization. (Tr. 64)  
 
 Applicant owes creditors approximately $135,000 in delinquent debt, as alleged in 
the SOR. It consists primarily of student loans (subparagraphs 1.b-1.d; 1.f-1.l; 1.n-1.q) and 
medical bills stemming from a three-day hospitalization in 2011 (subparagraphs 1.v-1.aa) 
(Tr. 52) 
 
 Applicant began incurring these debts in 2009 shortly after moving from her mobile 
home to her mother’s house. (Tr. 19) She moved in order to assist her mother manage her 
household affairs. Applicant kept her mobile home. (Tr. 39) 
 
 Shortly after Applicant moved, her mother fell ill and died. The costs of managing 
both her mother’s home and her mobile home, while attending college, and commuting 100 
miles roundtrip, daily to work caused Applicant to become delinquent in her debts. (Tr. 40- 
41) 
 
 In 2012, Applicant moved to an apartment within walking distance of her job. (Tr. 46) 
Also, she voluntarily surrendered her mobile home to the lender. The lender resold it and 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
Applicant owes no deficiency. She is unaware of any legal or financial obligations related to 
her mother’s home. Currently, her niece is living in the home. 
 
 The only SOR debts that Applicant is currently satisfying are a group of accounts 
owed to a student loan creditor (subparagraphs 1.c-1.d; 1.f-1.g). She has been paying this 
debt through a garnishment of approximately $227 per month since 2014. (AE D) The 
current balance is $24,904. Applicant considered filing for bankruptcy protection, but did 
not have enough money to pay the attorney. (Tr. 46) She has not received any financial 
counseling. 
 
 In addition to Applicant’s SOR debts, she owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
approximately $1,700 in delinquent income taxes, and she owes the state revenue 
authority $794 for 2014. (AE F at 1, 68) She incurred this debt because her reportable 
income was unusually high after the creditor alleged in subparagraph 1.e, canceled its 
$8,646 debt and reported it to the IRS. Since August 2016, Applicant has been paying the 
IRS $100 per month, and since April 2017, she has been paying her state income taxing 
authority $28 per month through installment agreements. (Tr. 54; GE F at 8, 74)  
 
 Applicant earns a net income of approximately $2,500 per month. (AE k at 3-4)  She 
maintains a budget. Over the past 18 months, her monthly disposable income has ranged 
between $300 and $800. (AE K at 2) 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
4 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and 
meet  financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or sensitive  information.“ (AG ¶ 
18)  Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the 
ability to do so,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
 Applicant’s financial trouble did not occur because of extravagant or foolish 
spending. Instead, her financial problems were part of an unsuccessful attempt to help her 
ailing mother with her expenses, while balancing her personal expenses. She consulted an 
attorney about her financial distress, who recommended she file for bankruptcy protection. 
However, she could not afford to pay the attorney’s retainer fee. Since 2014, she has 
moved to a location much closer to work, thus eliminating burdensome commuting 
expenses. In 2016, she began paying a federal income tax delinquency that was not 
5 
 
alleged in the SOR, and in 2017, she began paying a state income tax delinquency that 
was not alleged in the SOR, through installment plans.  AG § 20(b) and AG ¶ 20(g) apply. 
 
 Conversely, Applicant is paying the most money to reduce her debt through a wage 
garnishment. Such payments have limited probative value in assessing mitigation. 
Moreover, she has more than $100,000 of delinquent debt that she has not yet begun to 
address. Under these circumstances, the steps she has taken thus far constitute sufficient 
evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve her debts, but the large amount outstanding and 
unaddressed renders AG ¶ 20(c) inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 Applicant is an exceptional worker and a person of good 
character. The circumstances surrounding the incurrence of the debt is somewhat 
mitigating. However, these factors are not sufficient to overcome the security concern given 
the extremity of her delinquent debt, and the minimal amount resolved, to date. Under 
these circumstances, Applicant has not carried the burden. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a – 1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
