 
1 
 
  
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03540 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
  
History of the Case 
 
 On December 3, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial 
considerations security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
On December 28, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On July 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
28, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
for a hearing to be convened on August 26, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exs. A through Z, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to present additional documents. 
Additional documents were received and admitted as Exs. AA through NN. On September 
6, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (SOR Answer), he denied the collection debt3 
listed in SOR 1.i ($1,130). He stated he never had a lease with this company. He admitted 
the remaining debts. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as factual finding. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old combined technical solutions clerk who has been 
employed part time for a defense contractor with a test command since August 2014. (Ex. 
3, Tr. 19) He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. In 2005 and 2013, he divorced and 
has five children between the ages of 20 months and age 13. (Ex. 1, Tr. 14) Although he 
divorced his wife in 2013, they live together. (Ex. 1, Tr. 45) His ex-wife’s and current 
cohabitant is a certified nursing assistant (CNA) and she plans to go to school to become 
a licensed vocational nurse (LVN). (Tr. 50)  
 
Since the age of 10, Applicant has suffered from diabetes. (Tr. 20) His Type 1 
Diabetes prevented him from joining the military. (SOR Answer) He has suffered with 
diabetes for 23 years and had no health insurance4 for the last decade. He has used 
emergency rooms to receive the care he needed for his chronic condition. The SOR lists 
37 delinquent debts, of which 23 are medical debts. In the last couple of years, he has 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 Applicant’s ex-wife and current cohabitant testified that this was her legal obligation. (Tr. 46) The creditor 
removed it from his credit report. (Tr. 24) 
 
4 Under the Affordable Care Act, Applicant’s monthly premiums would have been $400 or $500, which he 
could not afford. (Tr. 30) 
 
3 
 
been working with a medical clinic to resolve his hospital and medical debts and to obtain 
medical treatment at a reasonable cost. (Tr. 20) He no longer has to use the emergency 
rooms for treatment. (Tr. 44) No new or recent delinquent medical debts are revealed in 
his current credit reports. (Tr. 20) He has sought the services of a company to assist in 
paying his debts and restoring his credit. (Ex. 3, SOR Answer) He owes one company 
$3,700 for medical services and has arranged to pay the creditor $50 per month. (Tr. 43) 
He has been making monthly payments on his medical debts from October 2016 through 
June 2017, except from December 2016 through February 2017 when he was 
unemployed. (Ex. AA and Exs. CC through NN)  
 
 In Applicant’s August 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) he listed 22 delinquent obligations: SOR 1.a – 1.g, 1.j – 1.q, and 1.s 
– 1.y. (Ex 1) The SOR lists 36 delinquent accounts totaling more than $30,000 and a 2003 
arrest for issuing a worthless check or draft without sufficient funds or credit. (Ex. 2) He 
wrote an $80 check that was not honored5, which cost him $432 in restitution and court 
costs. (Tr. 26) He no longer uses checks. (Tr. 27) 
 
 Applicant employed a legal advocate group to help him to address his delinquent 
obligations. He terminated the relationship when the group’s actions were increasing his 
debts and not lowering them. (Tr. 21)  
 
 Applicant owes an $857 college education collection debt (SOR 1.g). He states he 
does not know why this college debt exists. He has had numerous contacts with the 
college in attempts to address this debts. (Ex. 3, Tr. 32) When he contacted the business 
office and the financial aid office, each office told him they had no record of him owing a 
debt and he should contact the other office. When he attempted to make a $100 payment 
on the obligation, he was told the entire amount had to be paid in one lump-sum payment. 
(Ex. 3)  
 
 From April 2010 through April 2011, Applicant had a lease paying between $650 
and $750 per month. In April 2011, he gave notice that he would be vacating the property 
in May 2011. He was told he owed rent through July 2011, which is the SOR 1.a debt 
($1,314). Applicant was sued and the court decided the landlord’s claim for $2,000 was 
unfounded, but did decide Applicant owed $1,314 for the May 2011 rent and filing fees. 
(Ex. 3) He asserts he paid the debt in full in February 2012. (Ex. 3) He was told to make 
payment directly to the plaintiff’s bank and the plaintiff would inform the court when 
payment was made. (Tr. 31) He paid the judgment, but does not know if the plaintiff so 
informed the court. (Tr. 31)  
 
In October 2016, Applicant paid the electric bill (SOR 1.aa, $202) (Ex. BB) He 
owed $606 (SOR 1.jj) on a past-due student loan. He has arranged to make monthly 
payments of $50 each. (Tr. 25) He asserted he paid the $285 debt listed in SOR 1.w. (Tr. 
34) He has been arguing with the gas company (SOR 1.bb, $284) about a gas leak, which 
the gas company acknowledged did occur. (Tr. 36)  
                                                          
5 State law is very strict concerning the issuing of checks that are not honored. Normally, such a check 
will be sent to the county or district attorney’s office and an arrest warrant will be issued.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has brought current his past-due television cable bill (SOR 1.dd, $1,099) 
and currently has service with the company. (Ex. Q, Tr. 24) His ex-wife and current 
cohabitant has a delinquent account (SOR 1.j, $228) related to cell service. Applicant 
never had service from this company. (Tr. 32) He asserts this bill is not his debt. (Tr. 32) 
His ex-wife had a car bill (SOR 1.r, $3,257), which was not his debt. (Tr. 33) His ex-wife 
and current cohabitant testified that this was her vehicle debt. (Tr. 46)  
 
 Applicant had a rental agreement (SOR 1.ee, $2,600). (Tr. 36) He moved out and 
then back in with his then wife. He sent them a 30-day letter prior to leaving. (Tr. 36) He 
left and a year later he received a $2,600 bill. He has contacted the company repeatedly 
attempting to determine the nature of the debt. (Tr. 36) He has arranged to make $50 
monthly payments plus a $5 process fee on this debt. (Exs. CC-NN) 
  
 Applicant’s financial plan is to first address the medical debt and the student loan 
debt. Next he plans on addressing the gas bill (SOE 1.bb, $284), and another cable bill 
(SOR 1.cc, $497). (Tr. 37) He plans on paying the debts with lowest amounts first and go 
onto the debts with a higher balances. (Tr. 37) He also had hopes of returning to college. 
(Tr. 38) He also hopes to become a permanent employee with health care coverage. (Tr. 
40)  
 
 Applicant’s ex-wife and current cohabitant is attempting to work with the creditors 
to resolve the financial problems. (Tr. 49) He is current on his two monthly vehicle 
payments, which total $380. (Tr. 42) He is also current on his rent and utility bills and is 
not getting any calls or letters from collection firms. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
5 
 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
 
6 
 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 19 included three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
any may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b) and 19(c). Applicant had owed approximately 
$30,000 on 37 delinquent obligations. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. September 22, 2005) 
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
Applicant paid the $1,314 (SOR 1.a) judgement and the electrical bill (SOR 1.aa, 
$202). In 2003, 14 years ago, he was arrested for writing a check that was not honored. 
 
7 
 
That $80 check cost him $432. He has brought current his past-due television cable bill 
(SOR 1.dd, $1,099) and has service with the company. (Ex. Q) 
 
Applicant arranged $50 monthly payments on his $600 student loan debt. He has 
arranged to pay $50 on the $2,600 rental debt (SOR 1.ee). Sixty-two percent of the 
delinquent-SOR accounts, 23 of 37, are medical debts. He has arranged to pay $50 
monthly on $3,700 of the medical debts, other medical debts have been forgiven, and he 
is making monthly payments on additional medical debts. Except from December 2016 
through February 2017, when he was unemployed, he made payments on his medical 
debts, student loan debt, and rental debt.  
 
Applicant’s ex-wife and current cohabitant testified that three of the SOR debts 
(SOR 1.i, $1,113; SOR 1.j, $228; and SOR 1.r, $3,257) are her debts. These three debts 
represent approximately $4,600 of the $30,000 delinquent SOR debt.  
 
The delinquent obligations are numerous and some have yet to be fully addressed. 
The majority of his delinquent debt was medical debt. He has now arranged to have 
medical treatment without having to resort to using emergency rooms. He is unlikely to 
have such debts recur. There is nothing in the nature of the debts that showed poor 
judgment or untrustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
In 2013, Applicant and his wife divorced. His divorce was a circumstance beyond 
his control that impacted his ability to maintain financial stability. However, the impact of 
his divorce is somewhat mitigated by his ex-wife now being his cohabitant. He has had 
numerous periods of unemployment and when employed it was on a part-time basis. 
Being employed only part-time, he did not have medical insurance provided by his 
employer. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
Applicant has contacted his creditors and has been able to establish repayment 
agreements with some of his creditors. He paid the judgement, his electric bill, paid for 
the dishonored check written in 2003, and brought his television service debt current. He 
is making monthly payments on his medical bills and student loan. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to 
these debts. 
 
Applicant has five non-medical delinquent debts, which total approximately $2,200. 
He has not been able to address these debts because he is addressing his medical debts 
and other bills. However, an applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan 
for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. An applicant is required to act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions that evidence a serious intent to 
effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
 
What constitutes the responsible behavior depends on the facts of a given case. 
Applicant’s poor financial condition originated from periods of unemployment, part-time 
employment, and his medical problems, all of which were outside his control. He has 
acted responsibly given his limited resources in that he has addressed his financial 
 
8 
 
problems by (1) resolving some of the debts, (2) developing a repayment plan for his 
medical debts and student loan, and (3) taking reasonable actions to effectuate the plan.  
 
Applicant must establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
action to implement the plan, which he has done. The amount of the five delinquent 
accounts yet to be addressed, approximately $2,200, is not so substantial as to be 
disqualifying under the financial considerations security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case including under the whole-person concept. 
Applicant is addressing the majority of his delinquent obligations with the funds he has 
available. The amount he has yet to address is not large. Based on the repayment plans 
he is currently honoring, I believe he will address the remaining debts when he is able.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. See AG ¶¶ 
2(a) and 2(b). Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.kk:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
