 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00404 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on September 20, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on September 26, 2016, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no 
response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 8, is 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on July 21, 
2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He graduated from high school in 1982. Applicant has 
been employed as a security professional by a federal contractor since 1997. He reports 
no military service and he was married in 1995 and divorced in 2008. He has two adult 
daughters and a son. He adopted one of the daughters. Applicant did not disclose any 
delinquent debts or financial problems in section 26 of his Security Clearance 
Application (SCA).2  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR dated November 25, 2015, Applicant did not admit or 
deny the allegations of delinquent debts in the SOR totaling $53,512. Instead, he 
provided four pages from a credit-repair firm indicating that he had hired that 
commercial enterprise to supposedly help him resolved debts. Subsequently, Applicant 
was contacted for clarification and he provided an e-mail response dated April 13, 2016, 
requesting an administrative decision, and advising that he hired the credit-repair firm.3 
It is not clear what value Lexington Law added, or what services it performed. In a 
March 30, 2016, e-mail Applicant answered the allegations in the SOR.4 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a ($34,317 debt to a 
bank that was charged off) stating it had been paid off and satisfied. Yet, his June 2015 
credit report lists it as having been opened in 2006, and having been delinquent since 
June 2011. It does not re-appear on his September 2016 credit report.5 However, no 
documents or cancelled check or receipts were offered by Applicant to show that he 
paid this debt, as opposed to allowing it to fall off his credit report due to age, since it 
was charged off.  
 
In his Answer, Applicant also denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e, and 1.g, claiming 
that “the item is not mine” in each instance. Yet, they appear on his November 2012 
credit report in his name and as delinquent.6 No documents were offered to support his 
assertions. Applicant also denied SOR ¶ 1.f (home equity line of credit debt charged off 
in the amount of $15,580). Yet again, his 2012 credit report lists this debt as having 
been opened in 2006, and being delinquent since August 2010. Although Applicant has 
denied this debt, he has provided no explanation as to why he does not owe this debt, 
or documents of any payments, payment arrangements, or disputes.  
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 23, 2012 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 2, p. 11. 
 
4 Item 2, p. 12. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
 
                                             Policies 
 
 The DOD CAF took this action initially under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the former adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) effective on September 1, 2006. However, on December 10, 2016, the 
Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. This 
decision is based on the new AGs.7  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and othisevidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
7 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rathisthan actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
5 
 
 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, and his clearance interviews of January and June 2013. The Government 
produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.8 Applicant has not met that burden. None of 
the delinquent debts have been adequately addressed with corroborating 
documentation.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided no explanation of the facts and circumstances leading him to 
fall into debt. He presented no evidence that it was due to conditions that were beyond 
his control. He claims to have paid off some debts, and disputes others, but he has 
produced no documentation, with his Answer to the SOR, or in response to the FORM, 
to establish this. He has known about his financial problems and the concerns they 
                                                          
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
caused to the government since as early as January 2013 when he was confronted 
about them during his security clearance interview. He has not demonstrated that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide 
sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his 
debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. The Government established that 
Applicant was responsible for the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling $53,512. 
Applicant did not provide enough details with documentary corroboration about what he 
did to address his SOR debts. He did not provide documentation relating to any of the 
SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies 
of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact;9 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was responsible for 
the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate 
payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting 
to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof 
to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was crucial for him 
to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in the 
SOR. (FORM at 6) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. He did not describe financial counseling or provide 
his budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. He declined to do so.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                                          
9 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not met his burden 
of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to g.                        Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
