1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-04309 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
___________ 
Decision 
___________ 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges he used marijuana on multiple 
occasions from 2008 to at least April 2014. He has held a security clearance since 
October 2011. He tested positive for marijuana in April 2014 on his employer’s urinalysis 
test. Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use on his August 7, 2011 Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.      
Statement of the Case 
On August 24, 2014, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. (Item 5) On 
February 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the drug involvement and 
personal conduct guidelines. 
 
On May 18, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. (Item 4) On June 29, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM). On July 19, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, and he did 
not respond to the FORM. On May 22, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The case file 
consists of six exhibits. (Items 1-6) Applicant did not object to any of the Government 
exhibits, and they are admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d and 
2.a through 2.c. (Item 2) He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 27 years old, and he has been employed in information technology 
since July 2014.3 He attended college or university for four years; however, he did not 
receive a degree. He has two information technology certifications. (Item 4) He has never 
served in the military. He has never married, and he does not have any children.  
 
Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant began his marijuana use in 2008, and he continued his marijuana use 
until April 2014.4 He “smoked marijuana daily with some breaks of 30 days” between April 
2010 and May 2010. He stopped using marijuana in April 2014 because he wanted to 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s August 24, 
2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 
4)  
 
4 The sources for the information in this paragraph are Applicant’s November 12 and 14, 2014, and 
February 5, 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interviews (PSI). (Item 6)  
 
3 
                                         
 
retain his security clearance. He denied that he sold, transferred, manufactured, or grew 
marijuana. He used marijuana with his cousins and half-brother. He continues to 
associate with his cousins and half-brother. He used marijuana while holding a public 
trust position. He tested positive for marijuana on his employer’s random urinalysis test 
in April 2014. His employer suspended his employment until he passed a urinalysis test. 
He has not had any drug-related counseling.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On his August 7, 2011 SCA, Applicant denied that he used marijuana in the last 
seven years.5 On his August 24, 2014 SCA, Applicant said he used marijuana once, and 
he was caught on a urinalysis test in April 2014. He emphasized “I tried it once and was 
caught,” and it “happens to be my first and only offense.” He specifically denied that he 
had any other instances of illegal drug use. On his August 24, 2014, SCA he said he left 
employment with a DOD contractor by mutual agreement. In fact, he was fired. He said 
he lied because he was embarrassed, and he did not want his reputation at work to be 
damaged. He expressed his remorse for lying on his SCAs. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
                                            
5 The sources for the information in his paragraph are Applicant’s August 24, 2014 SCA, his SOR 
response, and his November 12 and 14, 2014, and February 5, 2015 OPM PSI. (Items 4, 5, 6)  
 
4 
                                         
 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 lists four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
Applicant’s SOR response and OPM PSIs establish Applicant possessed and used 
marijuana6 while hold a public trust position. His employer urinalysis test detected his 
marijuana use in April 2014. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c), and 25(f) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
                                            
 6 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 
21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement 
Administration listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales 
v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6 
                                         
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not 
recent. There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence 
of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.”5  
                                            
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, 
and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage of 
three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel the 
administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of law, 
the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply that 
mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR Case 
No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a rational 
basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at alcohol 
rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the administrative 
judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency analysis of an 
administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
 
There is no evidence of Applicant’s marijuana use after December 25, 2011. AG ¶ 
26(a) applies to his marijuana-related conduct.6   
 
 AG ¶¶ 26(b), 26(c), and 26(d) are not fully applicable. Applicant did not abuse 
drugs after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. Marijuana was 
never lawfully prescribed for him under federal law. He received drug and alcohol 
counseling; however, he continues to associate with marijuana users. 
     
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant used marijuana on multiple 
occasions from 2008 to April 2014. He has held a public trust position since 2011. He 
tested positive for marijuana in April 2014 on his employer’s urinalysis test. Drug 
involvement security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”9 In his SOR response, 
Applicant admitted that he lied about his history of marijuana use on his August 7, 2011 
SCA and on his August 24, 2014 SCA. On his August 24, 2014 SCA, he lied when he 
                                            
6 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
9 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
8 
                                         
 
said he left employment with a DOD contractor by mutual agreement. In fact, he was fired. 
He said he lied because he was embarrassed, and he did not want his reputation at work 
to be damaged. AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
   
AG ¶ 17(a) applies to his lies about his history of marijuana use and termination 
from employment on his August 24, 2014 SCA. Applicant disclosed his history of 
marijuana use and his termination to an OPM investigator. SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c are 
mitigated. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a is not mitigated. Applicant’s lie on his August 7, 2011 SCA was  
deliberate. This falsification by intentionally failing to disclose his marijuana use was 
 
9 
                                         
 
serious, improper, and raised a security concern. No mitigating conditions apply. Personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old, and he has been employed with his current employer in 
information technology since July 2014.  He attended college or university for four years; 
however, he did not receive a degree. He has two information technology certifications.   
 
Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions from 2008 to at least April 2014. 
He has held a security clearance since October 2011. He tested positive for marijuana in 
April 2014 on his employer’s urinalysis test. Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use 
on his August 7, 2011 SCA. His decision to reveal his history of marijuana use during his 
OPM PSI in 2014, his expression of remorse, and the termination of his marijuana use 
are important mitigation.   
 
Applicant’s falsification in a security context raises a serious security concern. The 
protection of national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes 
security, even when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant 
cannot be trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information. He did not establish his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time.  
 
10 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b and 2.c:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
