                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX   )       ISCR Case No. 15-07850 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 27 June 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 15 October 2016, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional information. DOHA assigned the case to me 1 July 2017.
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-7.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017. 
1
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.a. He is a 32-
year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a U.S. defense contractor since March 2015.
He has been continuously employed since August 2003, when he enlisted in the United
States military, from which he was honorably discharged in April 2013, in paygrade E-5.
He was underemployed as a construction worker March-May 2013, before obtaining
positions more fitting his professional qualifications. He seeks to regain the clearance
he obtained in April 2004.
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits (Items 5-7) substantiate, six
delinquent debts totaling nearly $13,000, all of which were included in a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition Applicant filed in November 2014, and had voluntarily dismissed in
April 2015.  Applicant denied the individual debts as having been resolved with his3
bankruptcy filing, although he acknowledged owing the debts during his July 2015
interview with a Government investigator (Item 7). Applicant admitted filing the
bankruptcy petition, and refiling the petition in October 2015. His plan was confirmed in
May 2016, requiring him to pay $350 monthly for 60 months, for a total of $21,000.4
Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to a severe cut in income due to a job
change. He has not been more specific, but presumably that job change was when his
enlistment ended. He was not allowed to reenlist, and he took a job as a construction
worker for three months in 2013. He has provided no details about his May 2013-March
2015 employment.
Applicant provided no budget or financial statement. He has not documented any
credit or financial counseling, although that would have been a requirement for fiing his
bankruptcy petition. He provided no work or character references, or any evidence of
community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
In July 2015, Applicant told a Government investigator that he had the bankruptcy petition dismissed because3
he was relocating for his defense contracting job, and had decided to resolve his delinquent debts directly with
his creditors. He claimed that he had reached repayment agreements with his creditors, and his wife was
currently making payments on the agreements (Item 7). However, he documented no payments.
Applicant disclosed this refiling in his July 2016 Answer to the SOR (Item 2), claimed that all the SOR debts4
were included in the filing, and claimed that he had been making the required plan payments. However, he 
provided no copy of the bankruptcy petition (only a case number) and no proof that he had been making plan
payments. Department Counsel obtained available internet documentation of the petition (Item 4), but that
documentation shows only that a plan that included SOR debt 1.e was confirmed in May 2016.
2
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant failed to fully mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has a history of
financial difficulties, which are ongoing.  He has not documented that his approved6
wage earner plan will resolve the alleged SOR debts.
Applicant’s case is a failure of proof. He has not documented that his financial
problems were due to circumstances beyond his control. While I might reasonably infer
that his three months’ employment as a construction worker was at a lower pay than his
military salary, the same inference cannot be drawn for his May 2013-March 2015
employment, and Applicant has provided no documentation that would allow me to
conclude that he had an extended period of unemployment after leaving the military.
Moreover, he has not documented that his refiled bankruptcy petition includes all the
alleged SOR debts. Finally, he has not documented that he has been making the
required payments on his approved plan.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations. 
His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple; although the circumstance which
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
¶19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; (c) a history6
of not meeting financial obligations;
3
led to his financial situation may be unlikely to recur.  Applicant’s financial problems7
have not been shown to be due to circumstances beyond his control, and while a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition may be consisered a responsible way to deal with his
deliquent debts, his documentation does not establish that it was a responsible course
of action.8
Applicant submitted no evidence to show that he received credit or financial
counseling, and even if I infer that he got financial counseling as part of his bankruptcy
process, he has not established that these debts are being resolved.  Having not9
documented that he has been making required plan payments, he cannot establish that
he has made a good-faith effort to address those debts.  Accordingly, I conclude10
Guideline F against Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that7
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and8
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear9
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise10
resolve debts.
4
