 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-08639 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s 
information about his financial problems. Although Applicant’s response to the SOR was 
plausible, he did not provide any documentation to corroborate his claims of payment or 
other resolution of his debts. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On February 12, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for 
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
 
 
2 
 
 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have a security clearance.1 
 
 On July 6, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
raising security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing. On February 1, 2017, I received this case, and I convened the 
requested hearing on March 8, 2017.  
 
 The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government 
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 3. I admitted Gx. 1 and 2, but sua sponte excluded Gx. 3.3 Applicant 
testified in his own behalf. I left the record open for three weeks after the hearing to 
afford Applicant an opportunity to submit documents in support of his testimony. I 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 20, 2017. The record closed on 
March 31, 2017, without any post-hearing submissions by either party. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $190,920 for 16 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.p). The mortgage debts at SOR 1.b and SOR 
1.i total $163,282 and constitute 85 percent of the total debt at issue. In response, 
Applicant denied SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.o. (Answer) As to these 
controverted issues of fact,4 the information in Gx. 2 supports the allegations Applicant 
denied. He admitted the remaining allegations and provided explanatory remarks with 
all of his responses. In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He and his wife have been married since September 
2013. A previous marriage ended in December 2002 after three years. Applicant has 
two children, ages 8 and 18, and one stepchild, age 13. (Gx. 1) 
 
 Applicant served in the United States Navy from June 1995 until October 2012. 
He received an honorable discharge as a petty officer first class. Applicant held a 
security clearance for his entire Navy career. In his e-QIP, Applicant made the general 
disclosure that he had financial problems because of unexpectedly having to leave the 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Tr. 18 - 19. 
 
4 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
 
 
3 
 
 
military. A credit report obtained during the ensuing background investigation revealed 
the debts alleged in the SOR. (Answer; Gx. 1 and 2) 
 
 The debts at SOR 1.b and 1.i are for a first mortgage and a home equity line of 
credit (HELOC), respectively. They pertain to a house Applicant bought in State A, while 
stationed there in December 2002. When he transferred to State B in 2008, he rented 
the house to a fellow sailor; however, the renter deployed without giving Applicant any 
advance notice. Applicant was unable to find another renter, and he did not have 
enough income to both meet his mortgage and HELOC in State A, and support himself 
in State B. The mortgage eventually went into foreclosure in 2011. As to the first 
mortgage, Applicant averred he has no remaining obligation. As to the HELOC, 
Applicant has been in contact with that creditor. He understands he still owes that debt, 
but he has not yet arranged to resolve it. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 41 - 43, 54 - 56, 72 - 73) 
 
 The Navy involuntarily separated Applicant after 17 years of service because he 
did not meet the Navy’s weight standards. He had hoped to retire from active duty after 
20 years of service. When he left the military, Applicant lived in State B, but accepted a 
position at a defense contractor doing work for which he was trained in the Navy. In 
anticipation of starting the job, he moved back to State A and rented a house there. 
Unfortunately, the job did not materialize because of unexpected DOD budget cuts. As 
a result, Applicant was unemployed for about six months, when he found work at a 
Walmart. Applicant worked there until November 2014, when he obtained his current job 
as an engineering technician at a defense contractor in State B. Applicant’s work 
includes extensive travel and requires he have a security clearance. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 
12, 20 - 21, 26 - 30) 
 
 When Applicant first started working for his current employer, his salary was 
barely enough to cover existing expenses. The debts he accumulated while 
unemployed and while working at Walmart went unpaid between his October 2012 
discharge and October 2014. Since then, Applicant’s monthly pay has increased from 
about $1,500 to about $3,600. He also is awaiting approval for partial disability 
payments from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) estimated at about $800 a 
month. Applicant estimates he and his wife have about $500 remaining after expenses 
with which to pay their past-due debts. (Answer; Tr. 22, 30 - 35) 
 
 As to the remaining debts listed in the SOR, Applicant claimed that he has paid 
some of them, and that he is making modest payments on others. Because he travels 
frequently for his job, his wife is generally in charge of their finances. This includes a 
household budget, filing income taxes, and paying bills. According to Applicant, she has 
records of the payments they have made. Applicant also claimed that he disputes other 
debts, and that he consulted with a financial counselor in 2016 who advised him to seek 
bankruptcy protection. He did not present any documents at the hearing. I held the 
record open for just over three weeks after the hearing based on his representation that 
he could provide documentation of his disputes and payments. He did not provide any 
documents in support of his case. (Answer; Tr. 37 - 41, 43 - 67, 71, 74 - 79) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
  
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
                                                 
5 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). I also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating 
conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s response to the SOR and the claims made at hearing touch on each 
of these mitigating conditions. Applicant’s debts resulted, at least in part, from the 
unexpected end of his military career. He claims to have paid, or that he is trying to 
resolve, his debts. He also claimed that he has more income now, and that he and his 
wife have paid or are resolving some of their debts. He also claims he has consulted 
with a financial professional about his debts. 
 
By contrast, the Government established a case for disqualification and the 
burden shifted to Applicant to provide sufficient information to support his claims and 
establish mitigation. He did not establish that he acted responsibly in the face of his 
financial problems or that his finances are actually under control. Based on the available 
information, I cannot conclude that any of the mitigating conditions under this guideline 
are applicable.  
  
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant served for 17 years in the Navy. He presents as a sincere and 
responsible family man whose financial problems were not due to misconduct or 
irresponsible financial management. Nonetheless, without sufficient information that it 
was his responsibility to provide, the doubts raised by the Government’s information 
about his finances remain. Because protection of the interests of national security is the 
principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against 
the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
