 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07272 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on June 2, 2016, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on August 1, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 9, 2016. She 
responded with documents, which I have marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
E. The case was assigned to me on May 25, 2017. The Government exhibits included in 
the FORM and AE A through E are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She served on 
active duty in the U.S. military from 2003 until she was honorably discharged in 2011. 
She deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan during her military service. She has an 
associate’s degree, which was awarded in in 2015. She is married with a child and a 
stepchild.1 
  
 Applicant’s husband was also in the military. After their discharges, they both had 
periods of unemployment. They were unable to pay all their bills, and several debts 
became delinquent. The SOR alleges a past-due mortgage loan; a past-due debt to a 
bank; a $226 delinquent utility account; and that Applicant did not file her 2014 state 
and federal income tax returns as required. The three debts are listed on a credit report 
obtained in April 2015.2 
 
 Applicant moved to another state after her discharge from the military. She 
owned a house near the military installation where she spent the majority of her military 
career. Her tenants severely damaged the property before they moved out. Applicant 
was unable to rent the property because of the damage, and she could not afford to 
repair it. She attempted to sell the property. The house was on the market 732 days. 
The house went into foreclosure and was obtained by the lender in August 2015.3 
 
 The lender issued an IRS Form 1099-A, which listed the balance of the principal 
outstanding on the mortgage loan as $81,798, and the fair market value of the property 
as $50,000. The house was sold to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs (VA) for $42,525. 
The lender received the sale price plus an additional $34,364 from the VA as part of its 
loan guaranty. The lender wrote off the deficiency balance of $12,344 and held 
Applicant harmless for the deficiency balance.4 
 
 SOR 1.b alleges and the credit report establishes that Applicant was $157 past 
due on a debt to a bank with a $5,205 balance. Applicant stated this was a loan for a 
motorcycle for her husband to lower his commuting costs. They were unable to sell the 
motorcycle to pay off the loan. Applicant was working with the creditor to resolve the 
debt.5 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $226 delinquent utility account (SOR 1.d). She stated 
they paid the balance in full before they were permitted to switch to a prepaid plan, 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3; AE D. 
 
2 Items 2-4; AE D. 
 
3 Items 1-4; AE D. 
 
4 Items 1; AE C. 
 
5 Items 1, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
which is less costly. She disputed the debt, but the results of the dispute are not in the 
record.6 
 
 Applicant did not work while she attended college from February 2013 through 
2015 in order to obtain the skills required for her current employment. She was 
supported by her husband and GI Bill payments, which are tax free.7 Applicant reported 
on her April 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), during her 
background interview in May 2015, and in response to the SOR that she did not file her 
2014 federal income tax returns when they were due. Despite those admissions, it is 
unclear that Applicant was required to file a federal income tax return in 2014.8 
Applicant lives in a state that has no state income tax.9 
 
 Applicant and her husband retained a tax professional who prepared and filed 
their 2014 and 2015 joint federal income tax returns in June 2016. The 2014 return 
indicated they were due a $5,123 refund. The 2015 return indicated they were due a 
$5,276 refund.10 
 
Applicant paid several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. She stated that 
her finances have gotten better. She lives within her means, and she intends to pay her 
debts on time.11 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 4. 
 
7 See https://www.irs.gov/individuals/tax-exclusion-for-veterans-education-benefits.  
 
8 See https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/i1040gi--2014.pdf.  
 
9 Items 1-3; AE D. 
 
10 AE A, B. 
 
11 Items 2-4; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
19(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required; 
 
20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
 The evidence is less clear as to AG ¶ 19(g). Applicant did not work while she was 
in college in 2014. Her GI Bill payments are tax free. Her husband was required to file a 
federal income tax return, but it is unclear whether she had the income that would have 
required her to file a return. In any event, Applicant and her husband filed 2014 and 
2015 joint federal income tax returns in June 2016. The returns indicated they were due 
refunds of more than $10,000. Any failure on Applicant’s part to file a 2014 federal 
income tax return is mitigated under AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
 Applicant and her husband both had periods of unemployment after they were 
discharged from the military. Her rental house near the installation where she spent the 
majority of her military career was severely damaged by tenants, making it impossible to 
rent and almost impossible to sell. It was on the market 732 days. After the house was 
foreclosed, the lender held Applicant harmless for the deficiency balance of $12,344. 
 
 Applicant paid several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. She stated that 
her finances have gotten better; she lives within her means; and she intends to pay her 
debts on time. The $226 delinquent utility account and the loan for a motorcycle that 
was $157 past due were not resolved when the record closed. However, I am convinced 
that she now has control of her finances, and her financial problems will be rectified. 
Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, particularly her deployments 
to Iraq and Afghanistan. I considered the cause of her financial problems and the steps 
 
7 
 
she has taken to improve them. Her finances are not perfect, but I am convinced that 
she will continue her efforts to rectify them. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
