 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-06527 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq. 
Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Shirin Shokrollahi, Esq. 
Griffith, Young & Lass 
 
 
July 25, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 The 
SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, 
DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 21, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was originally assigned to another 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
administrative judge on August 24, 2016. It was reassigned to a second administrative 
judge on September 12, 2016. The case was reassigned to me on September 20, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 26, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 3, 
which were admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I for Administrative 
Notice concerning The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan). Applicant testified on his 
own behalf and presented fifteen exhibits (Applicant Exhibits A through O), which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
November 3, 2016. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Pakistan. (Tr. 13-14.) Department Counsel provided a five-page 
summary of the facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to Pakistan, 
collectively identified as HE I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b, through 1.e. He admitted in part and 
denied in part SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, because his mother passed away before issuance 
of the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since 2009. He has held a security clearance 
since 2009. He is married to a native-born American citizen, and has two native-born 
American children.  
 
 Applicant was born in Pakistan in 1973. Applicant’s mother passed away in 2016. 
His father is 85 years old and retired. He has two older brothers and one older sister. All 
of them are citizens and live in Pakistan. Applicant’s sister takes care of their father. He 
talks to her about twice a month to enquire about his father’s health, which is fragile. He 
has even less contact with his brothers. Applicant’s family lives in a safe area of 
southwestern Pakistan, far away from any conflict zones. (Tr. 24-30, 74-78.) 
 
 Applicant’s oldest brother is married and has three sons. Applicant also has two 
cousins. He communicates with them very infrequently, primarily when he is in Pakistan 
on a visit. (Tr. 30-33.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s parents were very poor. In order to get an advanced education, 
Applicant joined the Pakistani military in 1991. He was severely injured in 1995 in a 
training accident. He was eventually discharged in approximately 1999 from the 
Pakistani military due to his injuries. Because of his injuries he receives a small pension 
from Pakistan. The pension began at $40 a month and is now approximately $140 a 
month. This pension is automatically deposited in a bank account in Pakistan. 
Applicant’s father has access to the money and withdraws some from time to time. 
Applicant submitted bank records substantiating this point. Applicant testified that he is 
more than willing to forego this money, since it is a miniscule amount compared to his 
assets in the United States. (Tr. 33-38, 42-46, 52, 63-66; Applicant Exhibits A, F, and 
O.) 
 
 Because of the advent of social media, Applicant was able to regain contact with 
some of his colleagues from his time in the military. However, the contacts are very 
sporadic, since Applicant does not like to use social media. He has no idea where most 
of these people live or what they currently do for a living. (Tr. 38-42.) 
 
 Applicant married his American wife in 1997. He moved to the United States in 
2000, and became a naturalized citizen in 2003. Applicant testified that he has worked 
hard since coming to the United States. Applicant’s wife was born and raised in the 
United States, and has lived in the same city all of her life. Applicant is active in his 
community. His wife and children do not speak Urdu, the national language of Pakistan. 
Applicant does not travel to Pakistan frequently. His last trip was in February 2016, for 
his mother’s memorial service. Before that his last trip to Pakistan was in 2013. (Tr. 52-
55, 66-68, 71-72; Applicant Exhibit B.) 
 
 In addition to working in the defense industry, Applicant is an entrepreneur. He 
owns commercial property in the United States. In addition, he also has several bank 
and investment accounts located in the United States. His net worth in the United States 
is approximately one million dollars. (Tr. 46-52, 58-63; Applicant Exhibits D, J, K, L, M, 
and N.) 
 
 Applicant is very aware of the responsibilities that come with holding a security 
clearance. He has been holding a security clearance since 2009 without problems. He 
has been very proactive in letting his supervisors know of any trips he was making to 
Pakistan. (Tr. 55-58, 73-74.) 
 
Pakistan 
 
 I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in HE I. Pakistan is a 
parliamentary federal republic, created in 1947 after British India was partitioned when 
the British government granted India its independence. Pakistan was created for the 
Moslem population of the Indian sub-continent. Its population is about 170 million. After 
September 11, 2001, Pakistan reassessed it relations with the Taliban and supported 
the U.S. and international coalition in its efforts to remove the Taliban from power. Many 
Islamic extremists and terrorists are known to inhabit parts of Pakistan, leading to a 
growth of their insurgency. Although Pakistan has intensified its efforts to deal with the 
 
4 
 
violence and terrorists, the country continues to experience serious problems. The U.S. 
Department of State confirms that many border cities are known as safe havens for 
terrorists. Numerous suicide bombings and kidnappings have taken place over the past 
years. Human rights violations continue to be a significant problem, as killings, torture, 
and disappearances remain prevalent. The Pakistani government maintains domestic 
intelligence surveillance activities. The U.S. government warns Americans against travel 
to Pakistan. 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant is a highly respected person and employee. His performance reviews 
for the years 2013 through 2015 show that he consistently achieves, and occasionally 
exceeds, the high expectations the company holds for of an employee of his experience 
and position. He has received personal recognition for his work, and is viewed as a 
subject matter expert in his field. (Applicant Exhibits E and G.) 
 
 Several people with personal and professional knowledge of Applicant submitted 
letters on his behalf. Four of the five correspondents have known Applicant for thirteen 
years or more. All five are members of the defense industry. Applicant is described as a 
person who displays “a very high degree of honesty, integrity, responsibility, courage, 
leadership and interpersonal skills.” All the writers have knowledge of his family 
background, and recommend him highly for a position of trust.  
  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
 
5 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires that the Government must present sufficient 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the “applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
 
6 
 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
  Applicant is from Pakistan and has family members there. In addition, he 
receives a small pension from the Pakistani government due to his service in the 
Pakistani military, which is deposited in a Pakistani bank. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant proved that he is a conscientious and patriotic American citizen and 
member of the defense industry. He has demonstrated that, while he is in contact with 
his family in Pakistan, there is no conflict of interest, because his sense of loyalty or 
 
7 
 
obligation to Pakistan is minimal. Further, he has deep and longstanding loyalties to the 
United States. He has lived in the United States permanently since 2000. His wife is a 
native-born American citizen, as are his two children. His financial assets in the United 
States far outweigh the minimal amount he receives from the Pakistani government, 
and which he is willing to forego if necessary. Applicant presented evidence of 
substantial ties to the United States. Applicant is knowledgeable about his security 
responsibilities and has been consistently fulfilling them for eight years. He can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest. 
Guideline B is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but may warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
respected by the people who wrote letters for him. He performs well at his job. While he 
was born Pakistan, he is an American by choice. He has been residing in the United 
States for the past 17 years. His closest familial ties are with his wife and children, all of 
whom are American citizens. His remaining contacts in Pakistan are infrequent. He can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to his 
longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
