                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 15-07091
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 24 March 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 20 July 2016, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional documents. DOHA assigned the case to me 22 May 2017.
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-4 .1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017. 
1
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. She is a 41-year-old customer
support analyst employed by a U.S. defense contractor since October 2012. She
previously served in the U.S. military from November 2004 to October 2012, from which
she was honorably discharged in paygrade E-5. She seeks to retain the clearance she
obtained while in the military.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 2-4) establish, and Applicant
admits seven delinquent debts totaling over $19,500. The debts consist of a delinquent
automobile account (SOR 1.a), two delinquent credit accounts (SOR 1.b-1.c), and four
delinquent medical debts (SOR 1.d-1.g). Applicant reported no financial problems on her
March 2015 clearance application (Item 3). In her May 2016 Answer (Item 2), Applicant
claimed to have made payment arrangements for SOR debts 1.a-1.c, and to have paid
the medical debts. However, she provided no documentation of the arrangements, and
her proffered evidence of April 2016 payments do not correlate to the SOR debts.3
Applicant provided no explanation for her financial problems. She provided no
budget or financial statement. She has not documented any financial or credit
counseling. She provided no work or character references, or any evidence of
community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the
relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Applicant’s bank records show a $208 payment to SOR creditor 1.g, but neither the account number nor the3
amount match the SOR allegation. Moreover, the $208 payment matches the total owed to SOR creditor 1.
and 1.f (the same creditor) but the account number does not match either debt. The bank records show a $200
payment to a collection agent, but the account number does not match any of the SOR account numbers. The
bank records show a $150 payment to SOR creditor 1.a, but again, the account number does not match the
SOR. Finally, the bank records show a bank draft for an illegible amount with an illegible draft number.
2
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of
financial difficulties that she has not explained, and for which she did not provide any
documentation of claimed payment arrangements, or provide sufficient corroboration of
claimed payments.5
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations. 
She has not clearly documented any efforts to resolve them.  Applicant did not document6
that her financial problems were due to circumstances beyond her control, and any
efforts to address them were not undertaken until after she received the SOR, which is
clearly not responsible.  Applicant has had no credit or financial counseling, and there is7
no evidence any of the debts are being resolved.  Her lack of effort does not constitute a8
good-faith effort to address her debts.  In addition, Applicant has not demonstrated a9
track record of living within her means. Furthermore, Applicant provided no “whole-
person” evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by her inaction on the debts.
Accordingly, I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; (c) a history5
of not meeting financial obligations;
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that8
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
3
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
4
