 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-08784 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate concerns 
raised by her failure to file federal income tax returns for several years. She also owes 
over $7,000 in unpaid federal taxes and $960 in other delinquent debts. Her request for 
eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on July 27, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She received 
the FORM on August 23, 2016, and did not respond. The documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 2 and 4 through 6, 
without objection. The document identified as GE 4 is excluded as explained below.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Inadmissibility of Report of Investigation (ROI) 
 
 GE 4 is a ROI summarizing the interview Applicant had with an investigator in 
May 2015. The interview, which contains adverse information, has not been 
authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions her that if she fails to object to the 
admission of the interview summary in her response to the FORM that her failure may 
be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to respond to 
the FORM or, specifically, to Footnote 1 does not demonstrate that she understands the 
concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not establish that she 
understands the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. 
Accordingly, GE 4 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 41, has worked for her employer, a federal contractor since October 
2004.  Applicant completed an eligibility application in March 2015. She disclosed her 
failure to file federal income tax returns from 2008 through 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a), indicating 
that at the time she completed the eligibility application she did not owe any outstanding 
taxes. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant also failed to file her federal 
income tax return in 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.b), that she owes approximately $7,100 in unpaid 
federal taxes for the 2008 through 2013 tax years (SOR ¶¶ 1.c - 1.h), and that she owes 
$960 in other delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.i - 1.m). Applicant admits all the SOR 
allegations except SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($287), 1.k ($287), and 1.m ($5). She does not provide 
any explanations for her denials.3 
 
 The record contains little information about Applicant’s reasons for failing to file 
and pay her federal income taxes on time. In her eligibility application, Applicant cites 
hardship, but does not elaborate. In her October 2015 response to interrogatories, 
Applicant was given an opportunity to “provide any additional information, facts or 
circumstances [she] believed would assist in the favorable adjudication in her case. The 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-2, 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
tax transcripts Applicant provided in response to the interrogatories show that Applicant 
filed her 2008 through 2013 federal tax returns between May and July 2015. Applicant 
also indicated that she has submitted an installment agreement request to the IRS. She 
did not provide any evidence of payments toward the resolution of her delinquent 
debts.4  
 
Law and Policy 
 
This case is adjudicated under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. The record 
establishes a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial 
obligations, to include, timely filing and paying her federal income taxes as required as 
well as $960 in other delinquent accounts.5 
 
None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not 
explain her inability to meet her financial obligations. Despite having multiple 
opportunities to do so, Applicant did not provide information about the status of the 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR or her efforts to repay them.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant failed to meet her burdens of production and persuasion 
to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. She did not provide any evidence to show 
financial rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, her request is denied.  
 
                                                          
4 GE 2, 6. 
 
5 AG ¶¶ 19(c), (f). 
 
4 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Applicant’s eligibility 
to occupy a position of trust is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
