KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant states the following: “I do not contend that the [J]udge’s decision was in
error.” Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-01153.a1
DATE: 07/07/2017
DATE: July 7, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01153
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 7, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On March 24, 2017, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert J. Kilmartin denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant  appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant states the following: “I do not contend that the [J]udge’s decision was in error.” 
Appeal Brief at 1.  He states that there are extenuating circumstances, including that he did not
carefully check his credit reports and that he did not intend to deceive anyone.  Applicant’s brief
appears to address a purported false statement alleged under Guideline E that the Judge resolved in
Applicant’s favor.  He also cites to statements from himself and his son concerning student loans,
which were included in the record as Applicant’s Response to the File of Relevant Material. 
However, he does not assert that the Judge erred in regard to the contents of these statements.  We
do not review a case de novo.  Our jurisdiction is limited to cases in which the appealing party has
alleged that the Judge committed harmful error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01734 at 1-2 (App.
Bd. Jan. 19, 2017).  Accordingly, the Decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
