 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01728 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant owes approximately $41,000 in unresolved 
delinquent debt, which he intentionally failed to disclose on his security clearance 
application. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended his case be submitted 
to an administrative judge for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on May 6, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on May 10, 2016, and did not respond. The documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked full time for his employer since August 2013. He has two 
other periods of employment with his company from February 2004 to April 2011 and 
February 1986 to September 2003, respectively. Applicant also listed concurrent full-
time employment with another company from December 2003 to August 2013. He 
completed a security clearance application, his first, in July 2014, disclosing unpaid 
federal income taxes. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant also owed over 
$41,000 in delinquent debt. These delinquent accounts and Applicant’s failure to 
disclose them on his security clearance application are the basis of the SOR 
allegations.3 
 
 The record contains little information to explain the origin of Applicant’s financial 
problems. He has worked consistently since 1986. His marriage of 27 years ended in 
divorce in 2010. He has one adult child. According to the credit reports in the record, the 
alleged debts became delinquent between 2008 and 2014. During this six-year period, 
Applicant lost a home to foreclosure, which is not alleged. Applicant provided neither an 
explanation for his delinquent accounts nor a plan to resolve them. The record does not 
contain any information about Applicant’s current finances.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-5. 
 
4 GE 2, 3-5.  
 
3 
 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An 
individual who is financially overextended is at a greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.5  
 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the record establish the 
Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial 
obligations. He has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to pay his creditors.6 
None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not 
submit any information to explain, extenuate, refute, or mitigate the SOR allegations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his delinquent 
accounts on his July 2014 security clearance application. Failure to provide truthful and 
candid answers during the national security investigative or adjudicative processes may 
indicate questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to 
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 AG ¶¶ 19 (a) – (c).  
 
4 
 
comply with rules and regulations that raises questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.7 Applicant admitted the 
allegation establishing the Government’s prima facie case. Because he offered no 
explanation for his omission, none of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant failed to meet his burden of production and 
persuasion to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. He did not provide any evidence to 
show financial rehabilitation or reform. Applicant did not offer any evidence to assuage 
concerns raised by the falsification of his security clearance application. Accordingly, his 
request for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 16(a). 
