 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  15-07225 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 12, 
2015. On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2016 (SOR Answer), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on a date not specified in the record. On September 26, 
2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, 
including documents identified as Items 1 through 7. She was given an opportunity to 
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation to the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on 
October 4, 2016, and did not respond. Items 1 through 3 contain the pleadings in the 
 
2 
 
case. Items 4 through 7 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
June 30, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. 
Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
I sua sponte amended the SOR to correct an apparent typographical error with 
respect to the numbering of subparagraphs. As drafted, the SOR alleged ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.f, and 1.c. through 1.f. The SOR, as amended, replaces ¶¶ 1.c. through 1.f with 1.g. 
through 1.j. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 41, divorced her first husband of a year in 2002 and her second 
husband of three years in 2007. She has no children. She received a bachelor-of-
science degree in April 2014 and a master's degree in business administration in May 
2015. She has been employed full time by a defense contractor since March 2015. Prior 
to that, she was unemployed for almost four years, beginning May 2011. She served 
honorably in the U.S. Navy from August 1993 through May 2011. She was previously 
granted a security clearance in 1998.4  
 
The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling $27,942. Applicant admitted 
seven debts totaling $25,996. She denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e (state tax 
lien/$1,031), 1.f (federal tax lien/$771), and 1.i (phone bill placed for collection/$144). 
SOR ¶ 1.e is established by her credit report dated March 2015.5 It does not appear on 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from the SOR 
Answer (Item 3), Applicant’s SCA (Item 4), and the summary of her May 2015 subject interview (Item 7). 
Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection to Item 7, I will 
consider only those facts in Item 7 that are not adverse to Applicant, unless they are contained in other 
evidence or based upon her admissions in the SOR Answer. 
 
4 Tr. at 7, 8, 38, 41, 64, 91, and 96; GE 3 at 21 and 34. 
 
5 GE 5 at 3. 
 
 
3 
 
her credit report dated September 2016.6 She claimed, without providing corroborating 
documentation, that the state tax lien was resolved after being issued in error based on 
a residency-status issue. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a duplicate of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j,7 and the federal tax lien was resolved by involuntary garnishment 
as of May 2015.8  
 
In the SOR Answer, without providing any specific details, Applicant attributed 
her delinquent debt to having “separated unexpectedly” from active duty in May 2011. 
During her 2015 interview, she explained that she “voluntarily left” at the end of her 
enlistment obligation. Following her Navy discharge, Applicant’s annual income 
decreased from a salary of $70,000 to unemployment benefits of $13,000. Beginning in 
June 2011, she began accumulating the SOR debts because she prioritized paying the 
necessities. Because she was deemed unqualified for the positions to which she 
applied in the three months following her discharge due to lack of a college degree, in 
August 2011, Applicant enrolled full time in college. Although she continued to actively 
seek employment during college, she was deemed unqualified due to lack of experience 
for the positions to which he applied. Applicant became gainfully employed in March 
2015.  
 
Since March 2015, Applicant has struggled to get her “head above water,” due to 
car-loan payments and student-loan payments. However, as of July 2016, she believed 
that she was able to begin proactively addressing her delinquent debt. To that end, she 
was researching bankruptcy options to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.d, 1.g through 1.h, and 1.j. Applicant has not received credit counseling. Although she 
scheduled an appointment with a credit-counseling company in January 2015, she 
never used its services.  
  
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”9 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”10 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”11 
                                                          
6 GE 6. 
 
7 GE 5 at 11. 
 
8 The only proof substantiating the federal tax lien is Applicant’s self-report about it in her SCA because it 
does not appear in either credit report (GE 5 or 6). As such, I find credible Applicant’s self-report about it 
being resolved by garnishment in 2015. 
  
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
10 Egan at 527. 
 
11 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”12 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.13 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”14 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.15 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.16 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.17 
 
                                                          
12 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
13 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
16 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”18 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”19 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debt) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR have not been mitigated by any of the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain 
unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant did not meet her burden to establish that 
her separation from the Navy and the unemployment that ensued were largely beyond 
her control. However, even if they were so deemed, she has also not met her burden to 
establish that she acted responsibly to address the resulting debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant did not receive financial 
counseling. Because she did not respond to the FORM, the record is silent as to what, if 
any, progress she made in researching her bankruptcy options. The record is also silent 
as to her current ability to repay delinquent debts, the reasons that they have persisted 
in the years since she became gainfully employed, or her plan to resolve them. I cannot 
conclude that her financial problems are under control at this time. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established. Applicant articulated a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of her state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.e). However, she did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate that basis or sufficient evidence to demonstrate 
actions taken to resolve the lien.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (g) is not established. Because she did not provide any corroborating 
documents, I cannot conclude that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e has been resolved. Her 
federal tax lien was resolved passively by an involuntary garnishment. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her failure to pay delinquent debt. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
