KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the
Judge. Rather, it contains a narrative statement in which Applicant references her excellent
employment history and her ongoing efforts to resolve her financial problems. The Board cannot
consider any new evidence on appeal. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-07971.a1
DATE: 07/26/2017
DATE: July 26, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07971
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 20, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested decided on
the written record.  On May 12, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert J. Kilmartin denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a narrative statement in which Applicant references her excellent employment
history and her ongoing efforts to resolve her financial problems.
The Board cannot consider any new evidence on appeal. See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Additionally, the Board does not review a case de novo. The Board’s authority to review a case is
limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
