 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04131 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
These AGs apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017, including 
 
2 
 
this one. Any changes resulting from the issuance of new Adjudicative Guidelines did 
not affect my decision in this case. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 17, 2016, and requested a decision 
on the administrative record, in lieu of a hearing. On May 31, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant received the FORM on June 24, 
2016. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and did 
not object to the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are 
the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 7 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. 
 
The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017. I initially e-mailed the parties and 
re-opened the record on June 1, 2017, to enable Applicant to submit updated 
documentation. When she did not respond, I called her on June 7, 2017, and learned 
she had not received the e-mail and was no longer sponsored for a clearance. On June 
13, 2017, I re-opened the record after learning that she was re-sponsored.1  
 
On June 26, 2017, Applicant responded and submitted additional documentation. 
Her e-mail and the attachments are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE F 
and admitted without objection.2 On June 29, 2017, I provided Applicant a copy of 
SEAD 4 by e-mail and reopened the record until July 10, 2017, to allow Applicant 
additional time to review it and to submit documentation.3 Applicant confirmed receipt of 
the e-mail but did not submit documentation by the deadline. The record closed on July 
10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and denied SOR ¶ 1.d, with explanations. Her 
admissions and other comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was married 
from 1989 to February 2014. She has two children (25 and 28).4 She has worked for 
various federal contractors since 1998. She was laid off in July 2012 after her employer 
lost the contract she was working on. She was unemployed until November 2013. From 
then until February 2014, she was employed as a contractor for a federal agency. She 
indicated that she was terminated from that position because she was unable to obtain 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I - HE VI.  
 
2 HE VII.  
 
3 HE VIII.  
 
4 Item 3.  
 
 
3 
 
a clearance due to the fact that she and her then-husband owed past-due federal 
income taxes.5 She was unemployed again from February to June 2014, when she was 
hired by a defense contractor. She remains employed in the defense industry, though 
with a different employer.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2014.7 She 
did not disclose the debts in the SOR, but did disclose that she was terminated from her 
job as a contractor with a federal agency because her family tax situation prevented her 
from getting a required clearance to work there.8  At the time, she was earning about 
$110,000 annually.9 
 
The four debts alleged in the SOR total about $14,448. All of the debts are found 
on Applicant’s December 28, 2015 credit report. (Item 7) She did not recognize SOR 
¶1.d ($337) but acknowledged the others.  
 
Applicant incurred her debts when she lost her position as a contractor with a 
federal agency in February 2014, when it came to light that she and her husband owed 
significant past-due federal income taxes. As a result, Applicant fell behind on her 
debts, including her rent, car payments, and other debts, including consumer accounts 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($1,016), 1.b ($2,506), as well as SOR ¶ 1.c, a $10,589 charged-off loan 
debt to a federal credit union. Applicant took out the loan to help pay for college for her 
two children.10 
 
Credit bureau reports from 2013 and 2014 also reflect a $65,407 federal tax lien 
issued against Applicant in May 2013.11 She filed an Innocent Spouse Relief Form 8897 
with the IRS in January 2014, and indicated it was adjudicated successfully.12 Her 
December 2014 credit report reflects that the lien was released in October 2014.13 
There is no allegation in the SOR concerning Applicant’s taxes.  
 
In her June 26, 2017 e-mail (AE A), Applicant indicated that she did not 
recognize the consumer debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b (though she admitted them in her 
                                                          
5 Item 3 at 12. 
 
6 HE IV (noting Applicant’s new sponsorship as of June 2017). 
 
7 Item 3.   
 
8 Item 3 at 12, 34.  
 
9 AE B at 3. In AE A, she estimated that she earned $120,000 at the time.  
 
10 Items 1, 2, 7.  
 
11 Items 4, 5.  
 
12 AE B – AE E.  
 
13 Items 4, 5, 7.  
 
 
4 
 
answer). She again did not recognize SOR ¶ 1.d. She indicated that $400 a month was 
being deducted or garnished from her pay for the loan debt at SOR ¶ 1.c, but she 
provided no documentation.14 Applicant did not provide any documentation regarding 
her efforts to pay, resolve, or settle any of her SOR debts. She did not provide any 
information about her current income and expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” AG ¶ 1(d) requires that in accordance with Exec. Or. 12968, as amended, 
“eligibility for covered individuals shall only be granted when facts and circumstances 
indicate that eligibility is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States, and any doubt shall be resolved in favor of national security.” 
 
Under ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
                                                          
14 AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .   
 
The guideline sets forth several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has several delinquent debts that remain unresolved. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.   
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial instability began after she lost her federal contracting 
position in February 2014, after it came to light that she and her then-husband owed 
significant past-due federal taxes. She was then unemployed until June 2014. Since she 
later successfully sought innocent spouse relief with the IRS, these were circumstances 
at least somewhat beyond Applicant’s control. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
Applicant undertook reasonable action under the circumstances to resolve her tax 
situation. This led to the release of the resulting tax lien (which was not alleged).  
 
 This leaves the four non-tax debts alleged in the SOR, all of which Applicant 
incurred during her subsequent period of unemployment. Those debts are unresolved. 
Applicant did not show sufficient evidence that she undertook reasonable action under 
the circumstances to resolve them. She indicated that the $10,589 charged-off loan is 
being resolved through a $400-a-month payment plan, but did not provide any 
corroborating documentation. It is reasonable to expect applicants to present 
 
6 
 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts,15 and she did not do so. While 
her tax issues are resolved, there is no documentary evidence of her efforts to pay, 
resolve, or settle the debts in the SOR.  
 
 I am therefore unable to find that Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay these 
debts, under AG ¶ 20(d). AG ¶ 20(b) also does not fully apply because she did not show 
that she acted responsibly under the circumstances in attempting to resolve them. She 
did not establish that her debts are unlikely to recur, and they continue to cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered the factors that led to 
Applicant’s financial difficulties and the steps she has taken to rectify them. Applicant 
did not provide sufficient evidence that she is repaying her delinquent debts. Because 
Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no 
opportunity to evaluate her credibility based on demeanor.16 Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 1, 2006)). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
