1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
          ------------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 15-07792 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant mitigated the concerns about foreign 
preference and foreign influence. Eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on October 1, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On May 12, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant his eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudication Guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006.  
2 
 
in a civil court case. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guidelines known as Guideline B for foreign influence and Guideline C for foreign 
preference. Applicant answered the SOR on June 20, 2016, and requested a decision 
based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On August 5, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on August 10, 2016. She was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on September 1, 2016.3 Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2017. Because 
new Adjudicative Guidelines became effective on June 8, 2017, I reopened the record 
sua sponte via email to the parties on June 29, 2017, until close of business July 13, 
2017. On July 12, 2017, Applicant emailed a reply advising that she had nothing to add 
to her original answer to the SOR. That email reply is marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were four items of evidence, three of which are marked as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 3.4 Exhibit 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the June 2015 background investigation. The 
ROI is not authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond 
to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that Applicant 
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
demonstrate that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 2 is inadmissible, and I have not considered 
the information in the ROI.    
 
 
                                                          
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 10, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated September 1, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first item in the FORM is the SOR and Applicant’s Answer. Because the SOR and the Answer are the 
pleadings in this case, they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 2 through 4 are marked as Exhibits 1 through 
3.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 57 years old and was born in Israel to parents who were, and remain, 
Israeli citizens. She fulfilled her mandatory military service in Israel by serving from March 
1979 until August 1980 in the Israeli Air Force. She arrived in the United States in 1989 
and was naturalized in 1996. She is divorced and remarried in 1991. Her current spouse 
is a native-born United States citizen. Since 2011, she and her spouse have lived in a 
home in the United States that they own. She has no children. Since September 2008, 
she has been employed in the United States maritime industry.6 Her security clearance 
sponsor is a defense contractor.  
 
Under Guideline C, the SOR alleged that (1) Applicant possesses a currently valid 
Israeli passport that she used to travel to Israel as recently as May 2015, and (2) she 
voted in Israeli elections. Under Guideline B, the SOR alleged that (1) Applicant’s parents 
are citizens and residents of Israel, (2) Applicant’s two sisters are citizens and residents 
of Israel, and (3) Applicant maintains close contact with several friends who are citizens 
and residents of Israel. Applicant reported her possession and use of her Israeli passport 
in her security clearance application. At the time she completed her security clearance 
application, she had a valid United States passport.7 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with explanations. Applicant stated that 
aside from her family ties to Israel, she has no interests in Israel, no bank accounts, or 
property, and has never worked there. She only voted once in Israel, at her family’s 
request, and only because she happened to be in Israel on election day. She has dual 
citizenship, because she was born in Israel. She is not willing to renounce that citizenship, 
because her parents are Holocaust survivors, for whom Israel was their salvation. She 
has had a successful sea-going career as an officer on American-flagged vessels, a 
United States Government research vessel, and is currently serving on commercial 
vessels of the United States Merchant Marine.8  
 
The record shows that Applicant has no financial interests, no business, 
professional activities, or government contacts, and no business ventures in Israel. 
Applicant visited Israel in March 2014 and in May 2015, and she used her Israeli passport. 
She communicates with her family in Israel via telephone about once a week. Applicant’s 
mother is 88 years old, and her father is 95 years old. Neither her parents nor her two 
sisters have, or have had, any affiliations with the Israeli government, military, security, 
defense industry, or intelligence services.9 
 
 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 1.   
 
7 Exhibit 1.  
 
8 Answer.   
 
9 Answer and Exhibit 1.   
 
4 
 
Administrative Notice (Israel) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I have 
taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about the country of Israel: 
 
 Israel is a parliamentary democracy with strong historic and cultural ties with the 
United States. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a cornerstone of U.S. Middle 
East policy since Israel’s inception. Both countries have a mutual interest in a 
peaceful, secure Middle East. On July 27, 2012, President Obama signed the United 
States-Israel Enhanced Security Cooperation Act. The goal of this legislation is to 
strengthen the military edge that Israel enjoys over its regional enemies.  
 
Israel aggressively targets sensitive U.S. technology. There have been some 
cases of U.S. government employees who have been prosecuted and convicted of 
spying against the U.S. for Israel. In 1998, Israel acknowledged that one of these 
individual’s had been its agent.  
 
The threat of terrorist attacks is growing in ungoverned or minimally governed 
areas near Israel’s borders with Syria, Lebanon, the Sinai Peninsula, and Libya. 
However, some unconventional security threats have been reduced because of 
factors such as heightened security measures vis- a- vis Palestinians, missile defense 
systems, and cyberwarfare capabilities.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”11 Under Egan, E.O. 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
 
                                                          
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
5 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19  
 
      Discussion 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
 Under AG C for foreign preference,20 suitability of an applicant may be questioned 
or put into doubt because he or she acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States:  
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns 
about an individual's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with 
U.S. national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact that a 
U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not disqualifying without an objective 
showing of such conflict or attempt at concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's 
exercise of any right or privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
20 AG ¶¶ 9, 10, and 11 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
6 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions: 
 
  AG ¶ 10(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
AG ¶ 10(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an 
appropriate security official, the possession of a passport or identity card 
issued by any country other than the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 10(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
 AG ¶ 10(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military organization; 
and,  
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. national 
security interests;  
 
AG ¶ 11(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
AG ¶ 11(b) the dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or 
birth in a foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
and,  
 
AG ¶ 11(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, 
entity, or association that poses a low national security risk.  
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant is an Israeli citizen by virtue of having been 
born in Israel to parents who were, and remain, Israeli citizens. Although that triggers a 
concern under AG ¶ 10(a), that concern is partially mitigated under AG ¶ 11(b).  Full 
mitigation depends, however, on whether there is “no evidence of foreign preference.”  
 
 The evidence also shows that Applicant traveled to Israel from the United States 
in March 2014 and in May 2015, using her Israeli passport. Under the 2006 Guidance C 
AG ¶ 10(c), Applicant’s mere possession of a current Israeli passport would have 
established a disqualifying factor, thereby creating a foreign preference. Under the 2017 
Guideline C AG ¶ 10(b), however, mere possession of a foreign passport is not a 
disqualifying factor, as long as an applicant “report[s], or fully disclose[s] when required, 
to an appropriate security official, the possession of a [foreign] passport.” AG ¶ 10(b) does 
not specifically identify when such disclosure is “required” or who may be “an appropriate 
security official.” I conclude that Applicant’s security clearance application required her to 
disclose any current foreign passports, which she did by disclosing her current Israeli 
7 
 
passport. I further conclude that the Office of Personnel Management investigator 
assigned to Applicant’s case was, under these circumstances, “an appropriate security 
official.” Therefore, AG ¶ 10(b) does not raise a foreign preference.  
 
 That does not, however, end the inquiry. AG ¶ 10(c) raises a foreign preference if 
an applicant “fail[s] to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.” In this case, 
Applicant identified Israel in response to the security clearance application question “to 
which countries [she] traveled” using her Israeli passport. That response sheds no light 
on whether Applicant failed to use her United States passport in exiting or entering the 
United States on her trips to Israel. Neither is the SOR of any help here, as it alleges only 
that Applicant used her Israeli passport to travel to Israel (which Applicant admitted). 
Therefore, the record is silent on whether Applicant failed to use her United States 
passport in exiting or entering the United States in her travels to Israel. As such, I must 
conclude that there is no foreign preference established under AG ¶ 10(c). This is a long-
winded (but I believe necessary) way of concluding that any concern under AG ¶ 10(a) is 
fully mitigated under AG ¶ 11(b).   
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant voted in Israeli elections. Under the 2006 AG 
¶ 10(a)(7), voting in a foreign election was an expressly articulated disqualifying factor. 
Not so in the revised Guideline C. The only roughly comparable disqualifying factor is AG 
¶ 10(d). AG ¶ 10(d) addresses “participation in foreign activities, including but not limited 
to” and then lists certain activities, none of which specifically identify voting as raising a 
security concern. On the one hand, one can argue that although voting is not expressly 
called out, there is no more fundamental a “participation in foreign activities” than casting 
a vote in another country’s election. On the other hand, one can argue that when the 
drafters of the Adjudicative Guidelines wanted to make voting in a foreign election a 
disqualifying factor, they did so expressly in the 2006 AG ¶ 10(a)(7). They did not, 
however, do so in the 2017 Guideline C. I conclude that the “including but not limited to” 
language in the current AG ¶ 10(d) is not meant to impliedly include voting in a foreign 
country’s election. Therefore, there is no security concern by reason of Applicant voting 
in Israeli elections.21  
 
 Given the long-standing alliance between the United States and Israel and their 
mutual interest in a peaceful and secure Middle East, I find that Applicant’s Israeli 
citizenship is not in conflict with United States security interests. Mitigating factors AG ¶¶ 
11(a) and (b) apply.  
  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
21 Because AG ¶ 10(a)(7) of the 2006 Guidelines expressly made voting in a foreign election a           
disqualifying condition, arguably the result here could have been different under those Guidelines. This 
singular incident, however, based on all the surrounding circumstances, would be outweighed by the 
favorable record evidence as a whole.  Thus, I would have concluded SOR ¶ 1.b in Applicant’s favor, even 
if I used the 2006 version of Guideline C. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 Under AG B for foreign influence,22 suitability of an applicant may be questioned 
or put into doubt, because he or she has foreign contacts and interests, including but not 
limited to, business, financial, and property interests, that may result in divided allegiance:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual maybe manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and,  
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and,  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organizations, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and,  
 
                                                          
22 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest.  
 
 The mere existence of close family ties with family members is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. If an applicant, however, has close relationships with 
relatives living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for 
foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, 
or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship between 
Israel and the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her relationships with her relatives living in 
Israel do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where she 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist her 
relatives living in Israel who might be coerced by governmental entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.”23 Furthermore, even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we also know that friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical 
fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Israel seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or her relatives living 
in Israel, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. The Government 
produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign influence.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with her relatives 
who live in Israel. Applicant communicates with her Israeli relatives by telephone on a 
weekly basis. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligations to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this 
                                                          
23 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
10 
 
presumption. Given the Israeli intelligence approach toward the United States, Applicant’s 
relationships with her relatives living in that country are sufficient to create “a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The next inquiry is whether mitigating conditions in AG ¶¶ 8(a) or 8(b) apply. AG ¶ 
8(a) partially applies. Applicant’s parents and siblings are not in government positions 
and do not have, or have not had, affiliations with the Israeli government.24 Therefore, it 
is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between her 
Israeli relatives and those of the United States.  
 
Applicant has met her burden to establish his “deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has lived in the United States since 1989 and has 
been a naturalized United States citizen since 1996. She has been married to a native-
born United States citizen since 1991. She and her husband have owned a home here 
since 2011. The evidence supports that Applicant has longstanding ties to the United 
States and would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies. 
 
Conclusion 
 
         The record does not create doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.25 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                           For Applicant 
    
  Subparagraph 1.b:                           For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B      For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a-d:     For Applicant  
                                                          
24 I discounted Applicant’s service in the Israeli Air Force, because it was compulsory and occurred almost 
40 years ago. 
   
25 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
11 
 
                     
 
  
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
