 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07758 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, the AGs were updated and replaced the AGs effective September 1, 2006.  This 
decision will be decided based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were to 
consider this case under the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the 
same outcome.  
  
 On July 7, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 27, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2017.  On June 2, 2017, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for June 14, 2017.  The hearing was held 
as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5.  Applicant testified and offered five 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – E. After the hearing, I 
marked the attachments to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR as AE F. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on June 22, 2017. The record was held open until June 28, 2017, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted additional documents 
which were admitted as AE G – AE M.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old potential employee of a DOD contractor seeking to 
maintain a security clearance. She has worked for DOD contractors in various jobs 
since 2003. She was let go from her recent employer about a month ago. She has an 
employment offer with another DOD contractor subject to the outcome of this security 
clearance proceeding. She has a high school diploma. She is in the process of divorcing 
her husband. She has three children. A son and a daughter who are in their early 20s, 
and a six-year-old son.  All of her children still live with her.  Applicant is also the legal 
guardian of her cousin’s son, age 17. (Tr. at 14, 36; Gov 1; Answer to SOR)   
 
On July 11, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaires for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). Applicant’s security clearance background 
investigation revealed that she had the following delinquent debts: a $30 medical bill 
that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2); a $30 medical bill 
that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2); an $11,109 charged-
off automobile loan (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 4); a $395 charged-off 
credit union account (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 4); and a $2,414 
medical account that was placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 5 at 5) 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: an $816 cable television account that 
was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 5 at 6); a $758 delinquent cell phone account 
that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 6); a $218 medical account placed 
for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 5 at 6); a $205 traffic ticket placed for collection; (SOR ¶ 
1i: Gov 5 at 6); a $150 medical account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 4 
at 2; Gov 5 at 6); and a $49 music club account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 5 
at 7). 
  
Applicant states that her pending divorce and chronic medical conditions 
contributed to her inability to pay her debts.  Her husband cannot be located and she 
cannot finalize the divorce without his appearance because of the child support, 
alimony, and custody issues. He provides no financial support for the family. (Tr. 26, 31, 
AE A, AE F at 5) 
 
Applicant’s medical problems began in 2008.  In 2010, she was rushed to the 
emergency room because of an ectopic pregnancy. She was carrying twins.  One twin 
died and the other survived, but has numerous medical issues and special needs. In 
2013, Applicant was diagnosed with stage 2 cancer. After an operation and radiation 
treatment she was in remission. A few weeks before the hearing, she learned that the 
 
3 
 
 
cancer has returned. During her medical treatments, she would be out of the office for 
extended periods of time. She would often have to take leave without pay because she 
did not have a lot of leave. She has no savings. (Tr. 27-30, 41-42; AE C; AE F at 2—4)  
 
Applicant is under a lot of stress because she is the sole provider for her 
children. Her father passed away this past year and her cousin, with whom she was as 
close as a sister, was murdered. After her death, she became the legal guardian of her 
cousin’s 17-year-old son. (Tr. 29-30) 
 
The status of the SOR debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a and SOR ¶ 1.b:  two $30 medical accounts placed for collection. 
Applicant’s financial specialist formally disputed the debts. The outcome of the dispute 
is pending. (Tr. 43-44; AE D; AE H) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c:  $11,109 charged-off automobile loan.  At the hearing, Applicant 
believed this automobile loan belonged to her son. She co-signed the loan. She learned 
after the hearing, that this was a loan for one of Applicant’s cars that was repossessed 
in 2013.  Applicant agreed to pay $25 a month to repay the debt (Tr. 44-47; AE B; AE G; 
AE K).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $395 charged-off account with credit union:  Applicant settled and 
paid this debt on November 3, 2016. (Tr. 48; AE I)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e:  $2,414 medical account placed for collection: Applicant claims this 
debt was paid, disputed, and deleted from her credit report. A statement from her 
previous financial counselor verified this in a letter dated June 24, 2015. (Tr. 49; AE M) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  $816 cable television bill placed for collection: The debt was paid on 
August 24, 2016. (Tr. 50; AE E at 13-14; AE J)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $758 cell phone bill placed for collection:  Applicant settled and paid 
this debt on June 15, 2017. (Tr. 51; AE L) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h:  $218 medical debt that was placed for collection: Applicant disputes 
this debt. It is not listed on her recent credit reports. (Tr. 51; Gov 3; AE E)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.i:  $205 speeding ticket: Applicant disputes this debt. It is not listed on 
her most recent credit reports. It was disputed and deleted in June 2015. (Tr. 51; AE M; 
Gov 3; AE E) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: $180 medical bill placed for collection:  Applicant disputes this debt. 
She claims it is paid. It is not listed on her most recent credit reports. (Tr. 52; Gov 3; AE 
E) 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k:  $49 music club account placed for collection: Applicant denies this 
debt. She does not recognize this account. It does not appear on her recent credit 
reports. (Tr. 52; Gov 3; AE E) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant provided a recent copy of her credit report, dated 
June 13, 2017.  Several additional delinquent accounts were added to include a $1,637 
collection account for past due rent (AE E at 8); a $450 cable television account placed 
for collection (AE E at 8-9); an $84 account placed for collection (AE E at 9-10); a $227 
charged-off credit card account (AE E at 10); a $60 medical laboratory collection 
account (AE E at 11-12); a $4,933 car loan that was charged-off in January 2015 (AE E 
at 17 (This is likely her son’s car loan which she co-signed.))   
 
Applicant recently hired a credit repair firm to assist her with disputing and/or 
settling her delinquent debts. In 2016, she hired another credit repair firm, but stopped 
the agreement after a year because she thought that they had not made any progress 
on resolving her debts. Applicant’s current financial firm sent out disputes regarding all 
of the accounts on her credit report on June 13, 2017. No response was received at the 
close of the record. (AE H) 
 
Applicant’s June 2017 credit report also indicated accounts that were not alleged 
in the SOR, but were settled and paid, to include: a medical account with the account 
number 123660XX (AE E at 6 and 14); a $661 credit card account (AE E at 12); and an 
account that settled for less than the full balance (AE E at 13). Applicant is paying what 
she can afford to pay under the circumstances. She is current on federal and state 
taxes. (Tr. 57)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 Applicant has encountered financial problems for several years, resulting in car 
repossessions, medical debts, and some consumer debts. The SOR alleged 11  
delinquent debts with an approximate total of $16,204. The largest debt is an $11,109 
car repossession (SOR ¶ 1.c). There are five medical accounts, totaling $2,872; and  
five consumer accounts totaling $2,223. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter 
until evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts 
under agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, 
an applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of 
risk inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to 
be debt free, but is required to manage his or her finances in such a way as to meet his 
or her financial obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
7 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolved the issue.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems continue. She 
has incurred delinquent accounts since at least 2008 when her medical problems 
began.   
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies because circumstances beyond Applicant’s control have 
adversely affected her finances. Her husband left her and does not pay child support. 
She is unable to finalize the divorce because he cannot be located. Applicant has a 
special needs child. She has suffered from serious health issues since 2008. Applicant 
is also currently unemployed which impacts her ability to pay her debts. Considering the 
challenges Applicant has been faced with over the past several years, she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  Aside from the car repossession, she only had 
five consumer debts totaling $2,223.  She does not live above her means and appears 
to be trying to meet her family’s daily living expenses. When she can, she attempts to 
resolve her delinquent debts.   
 
 AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve her 
delinquent debts. She provided proof that she resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
1.f, and 1.g. She recently entered into repayment agreements with the car repossession 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant is putting forth a good-faith effort to resolve her 
delinquent debts within her means. 
 
AG & 20(e) partially applies. Applicant formally disputed all of her debts.  At the 
close of the record, she had not received results of the outcome of her disputes. The 
outcomes of the disputes are unclear. However, she is making efforts to resolve her 
delinquencies.     
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s family 
circumstances and health issues.  I considered that her estranged husband does not 
provide child support.  While Applicant’s financial history is not perfect, she is doing 
what she can to resolve her debts based on her current financial situation. I have no 
doubt that Applicant will continue to resolve her debts when she finds full-time 
employment. Security concerns under financial considerations are mitigated. 
    
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.k:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
