 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06708 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 5, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 3, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On July 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on November 15, 2016.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 15, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 18, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  The Government offered four exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant 
 
2 
 
offered no exhibits.  He also testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2017. 
 
 The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 29 years old. He is married and has three children. He has a high 
school diploma and one year of college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a 
Fire and Security Line Technician.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified seven debts totaling approximately $26,000.  Applicant admitted each of the 
allegations in the SOR.  (See Answer)  Credit Reports of Applicant dated March 18, 
2015; and November 7, 2016, confirm this indebtedness.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 
4.)  He has been working for his current employer since 2014.  
 
 Applicant explained that he has consistently had employment and earned 
income, but there were periods over the past ten years where work was slow and he 
was forced to draw unemployment to subsidize his income.  During his periods of 
financial hardship, a number of his debts became delinquent and were eventually sent 
to collection.  Applicant did not pay the debts.  Instead he has waited for them to fall off 
his credit report.  The following debts listed in the SOR are the debts at issue.   
 
 1(a) A delinquent account for a repossessed vehicle was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $23,157.  Applicant did not pay the debt.  The debt remains 
owing.  (Tr. pp. 21-22.)    
 
 1(b) A delinquent credit card debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $385. Applicant has no recollection of the debt and he did 
 
3 
 
not pay it.  He claims that the debt has fallen off of his credit report.  (Tr. pp. 22-25.)  
The debt remains owing.       
 
 1(c) A delinquent cell phone debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $1,055.  Applicant did not pay the debt.  He claims that the 
debt has fallen off of his credit report.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. pp. 25-26.)       
 
 1(d) A delinquent cell phone debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $962.  Applicant did not pay the debt.  He claims that the 
debt has fallen off of his credit report.  (Tr. p. 27.)  The debt remains owing.   
 
 1(e) A delinquent cable bill debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the 
approximate amount $390.  Applicant claims that the debt has fallen off of his credit 
report.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 28.)    
 
 1(f) A delinquent debt owed to a bank for an overdraft fee was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $259.  Applicant did not pay the debt.  He 
claims that it has fallen off of his credit report.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 29.)   
 
 1(g) A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the 
approximate amount of $165.  Applicant disputed the debt as he does not believe that it 
is his.  It has fallen off of his credit report.  (Tr. pp. 29-30.)       
 
 1(h) A delinquent cable debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $162.  Applicant did not pay the debt.  He claims that it has 
fallen off of his credit report.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. pp. 30-31.)   
 
 1(i) A delinquent power debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the 
approximate amount of $137.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 30.)      
 
 Since 2011, Applicant has worked full-time without interruption.  He is the sole 
provider of his household.  He has $300 in his checking account, and no money in 
savings.  He is currently involved in a rent-to-own option where he has $3,000 that he 
has accumulated so far.  He does not have a 401(K) but expects to be vested in a union 
pension in March 2019.  Applicant now believes that since his delinquent debt is no 
longer reflecting as delinquent on his credit report, he may be eligible to purchase a 
house.  He plans to purchase a house in the near future.      
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Although Applicant has consistently been employed over the past ten years, 
there were times when work was slow, and he did not earn enough to pay his bills.  
During this period, his debts became delinquent and were eventually sent to collection.  
Since 2011, he has had full-time stable employment.  Despite this, Applicant did not pay 
his debts, but allowed them to fall off of his credit report.  He has not sufficiently 
addressed his delinquent debts, nor has he shown systematic proof of payment toward 
any of his debts.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems have not been mitigated.  He has done nothing to 
resolve his debt.  Instead of trying to pay his debts, he ignored them and allowed them 
to fall off of his credit report.  He has not addressed his debts in a responsible or timely 
manner, as they have all been sent to collection or charged off and remain outstanding.  
He has failed to demonstrate that he acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to his 
debts.  To make things worse, Applicant now believes that he is eligible to purchase a 
house because his debts are no longer showing delinquent on his credit report.  This is 
irrational thinking and shows poor judgment.   
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and, or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
