 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No.: 15-08272 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 12, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated the concerns related to foreign influence raised by his mother and two 
brothers who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 15, 2016. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
September 1, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items and an 
additional request for Administrative Notice, was mailed to Applicant on September 1, 
2016, and received by him on September 24, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in a submission dated September 24, 2016. 
He did not object to Items 1 through 4. Applicant also submitted additional information in 
his FORM response, to which Department Counsel had no objection. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on June 5, 2017. Items 1 through 4 are admitted into evidence. 
Applicant’s response to the FORM is marked as exhibit (AE) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
AG, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is 
issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a six-page summary of the 
facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan, marked as 
Item 5. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 The SOR alleged, and Applicant admitted, that his mother and two brothers are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Those admissions are incorporated into the 
following facts: 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He is unmarried and has no children. (Item 3.) He was 
born in Afghanistan. He immigrated to the United States in March 2009, under a special 
immigrant visa, which he qualified for due to his five years of service supporting U.S. 
 
 
3 
 
 
military forces as a linguist. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen on April 3, 2014. He 
seeks a security clearance in connection with his work as a linguist. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is the youngest of six siblings. He has four brothers and one sister. 
One brother is a citizen of Afghanistan and resident in Hungary; one brother is a citizen 
of Afghanistan and resident in Austria; and two brothers are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His sister is a citizen and resident of Canada. Applicant’s eldest brother, 
who lives in Kabul, Afghanistan, is medically disabled and has never been employed. 
His other brother in Afghanistan works as a car dealer. Both brothers reside with 
Applicant’s mother. Applicant communicates with his brothers and sister on a weekly 
basis. 
 
 Applicant’s mother is also a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. His father is 
deceased. Applicant’s mother is a “housewife” and cares for her disabled son. Applicant 
talks to his mother on a daily basis. (Item 2.) Between 2011 and 2012, Applicant sent a 
total of $160,000 to his mother in Afghanistan to help her buy a house and improve her 
living conditions. (Item 4.) He has not provided additional funds since that one-time gift. 
(AE A.) He acquired the funds by saving his salary, which he documented for the 
record. (AE A.)  
 
 Applicant noted: 
 
I’m certain you will agree, I have no control over Afghanistan. So to be 
held accountable for issues that are beyond my control seems to be 
unreasonable. Also, I’d like to state that I have honorably and 
professionally served as a contractor and employee of the United States 
since 2004 with no evidence of exploitation or wrong doing during which 
time I had relations with my family who are from and live in Afghanistan. 
Finally, I agree, there is potential for a conflict of interest. I argue that there 
has always been a potential for a conflict of interest since my employment 
started in 2004. I will also reiterate that the potential for a conflict of 
interest is an issue that is beyond my control. The facts of giving my 
mother money and maintaining connection with my family does not 
change the potential for a conflict of interest. (AE A.) 
  
 The U.S. Department of State has issued a travel warning with respect to 
Afghanistan. It notes that travel to all areas of Afghanistan is unsafe due to the ongoing 
risk of kidnapping, hostage taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, 
suicide bombings, and insurgent attacks. Attacks may target official Afghan and U.S. 
governmental convoys and compounds. Extremists associated with Taliban networks, 
the Islamic State, and Levant are active throughout Afghanistan. Widespread human 
rights abuses are reported. (Item 5.)  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant has close connections to his mother and two brothers, who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. He contacts his mother on a daily basis and his brothers 
weekly. Further, there is an articulated heightened risk associated with having ties to 
family members in Afghanistan, due to the activities of terrorist organizations and 
insurgents operating within its borders. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
 
6 
 
 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 None of the above conditions are mitigating in this instance. Applicant admitted 
that a potential for a conflict of interest was present due to his ties to his family in 
Afghanistan. He is in close contact with them, communicating with his mother and 
brothers frequently. He failed to demonstrate deep and longstanding loyalties to the 
United States. While he is credited for his years of service to the United States as a 
linguist, the record contains little information on assets, or physical or emotional bonds 
to the United States. Without more information, it cannot be determined that Applicant 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant 
served honorably as a linguist for five years. However, the record lacks information to 
support a finding that he would resolve any conflicts of interest in favor of the United 
States. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Foreign 
Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
