 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06891 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 31, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated written reply to the SOR, and requested a 
decision on the record. (RSOR.) Department Counsel requested that the case be 
decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on July 25, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
of hearing on August 7, 2016, scheduling the hearing for August 29, 2016. Because the 
Applicant was unavailable for several months, a second notice of hearing was issued on 
October 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 21, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented no 
documents. The record was left open until January 22, 2017, for receipt of 
documentation. Documents were submitted and have been marked as Applicant’s 
Exhibits A and B.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a summary of the facts, 
supported by Exhibit 4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR 1.a and 1.c. through 1.f. He denied 
SOR allegation 1.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He was born in Afghanistan in 1985, and he moved to 
the United States in 2008. He became a naturalized United States citizen in 2014. 
Applicant has been married to his wife since 2008, and they have one son, age 4. 
Applicant's wife was born in Afghanistan, and she and their son are both Dutch citizens. 
Applicant indicated that when he has completed his paperwork he will apply for his son 
to become a United States citizen. Applicant graduated high school and attended three 
years of law school in his native Afghanistan. He is also a registered dental assistant. 
He has been employed by a defense contractor as a Linguist/Interpreter since January 
2015, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the 
defense sector. (Tr at 5-6, 26-32, 36.) 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence  
 
 The SOR lists six allegations regarding Foreign Influence, under Adjudicative 
Guideline B:  
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. As reviewed above, Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that his mother is approximately 65, and is a housewife. She 
lives off Applicant's late father’s pension, but Applicant also supplies $300 to $500 a 
month. Applicant indicated that his mother plans to move to the United States once he 
 
3 
 
has a place for her to live with him, and he does all of the paperwork involved. He 
speaks with his mother once or twice a month. (Tr at 49-52, 54, 63.)  
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has two brothers, who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. Applicant denied this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant 
testified that one of his brothers is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, but his other 
brother resides in the United Kingdom and is a citizen of the Netherlands. Applicant’s 
brother, who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, is a part-time college teacher. He 
resides with Applicant's mother, and Applicant speaks to him whenever he call his 
mother, once or twice a month. (Tr at 52-54.) 
 
 2.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has four sisters, who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. He testified 
that he has not spoken to one sister for more than two years, and the other three he 
speaks to once a year. He stated that one of his sisters teaches at a private school. (Tr 
at 54-57.) 
 
 2.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has three brothers-in-law, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of his brothers-in-law was a captain in the 
Afghan army. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. He testified that since he 
does not speak to this bother-in-law, who was a captain in the Afghan army, he does 
not know what his current status is in the military. (Tr at 57.) 
 
 2.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has one sister-in-law, who is a citizen 
and resident of Afghanistan. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant 
described her as a housewife. (Tr at 58.) 
 
 2.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has one uncle, who is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. He testified that 
his uncle is a civil engineer. (Tr at 58-60.) 
 
 Applicant testified that beside his wife and son, his only relatives in the United 
States are third or fourth cousins with whom he has no regular contact. None of his 
relatives in Afghanistan have come to visit him in the United States. He owns no 
property in the United States, Afghanistan, or anywhere else, although he does hope to 
purchase a home in the U.S. Applicant testified that he is totally loyal to the United 
States. (Tr at 35, 39, 62.)  
 
Mitigation  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of documents in mitigation. They include seven 
very positive character letters (Exhibit A) and a packet of supporting documents, which 
included: a Petition for name change, and 14 letters and certificates of appreciation and 
training. (Exhibit B.)   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Current Status of Afghanistan 
 
 Afghanistan has been an independent nation since August 1919, after the British 
relinquished control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 until a military coup in 1973. 
Following a Soviet supported coup in 1978 a Marxist government emerged. In 1979, 
Soviet forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan, until the Soviets withdrew in 1989. 
After the withdrawal a civil war continued, and in the mid-1990s the Taliban rose to 
power. The Taliban committed massive human rights violations and provided sanctuary 
to Osama Bin-Laden and Al Quaida. After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks the 
United States forces and a coalition commenced military operations in October 2001, 
and forced the Taliban out of power and a new democratic government was installed in 
2004.  
 
 Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor, and the Afghan-Taliban 
dominated insurgency has become increasingly frequent, sophisticated, and 
destabilizing. Overall, the State Department has declared that the security threat to all 
American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of Afghanistan is immune 
from violence. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
5 
 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Disqualifying conditions (a) and (b) are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
 
6 
 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; 
 
(d) counterintelligence information, whether classified or unclassified, that 
indicates the individual's access to classified information or eligibility for a 
sensitive position may involve unacceptable risk to national security; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest;  
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence entity; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S., that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
  Applicant has a significant number of close family members, especially his 
mother to whom he gives $300 to $500 a month for support, who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. His ties to the United States are extremely limited to only his 
wife and son, neither of whom are currently United States citizens. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
 
7 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Because of the strong familial ties to Afghanistan, and the limited contact with the 
United States, I do not find that any of the mitigating factors are applicable in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
8 
 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant not mitigated the Foreign 
Influence security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
