 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-08266 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances beyond his control. 
However, he did not respond in a manner that reflects well on his judgment and 
reliability. Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s 
information, and his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On September 4, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On March 18, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing. 
 
 I received this case on November 7, 2016, and convened the requested hearing 
on January 26, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5, which I admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. A transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on 
February 3, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $165,831 for 
four delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.d), including two federal tax debts (SOR 
1.b and 1.c) and an unpaid property tax bill (SOR 1.d). The Government also alleged 
that in November 2012, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition discharged in 
February 2013. In response, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR 
allegations. (Answer) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. In 1984, he earned his doctorate in the scientific 
specialty in which he has worked since at least 1995. Since January 2015, he has been 
employed as a research scientist and professor at a state university. Since August 
2012, Applicant also has worked as an independent consultant for private businesses 
and government entities. It is this position for which Applicant requires a security 
clearance. (Gx. 1; Tr. 44, 60) 
 
 Applicant was married from 1975 until December 2016, when a divorce was 
finalized. Applicant and his ex-wife had been separated since 2014. Applicant is not 
required to financially support his ex-wife, but shortly after they divorced, she became 
disabled. Applicant still carries her on his medical insurance. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 
26, 52) 
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife have one adult son together. When their son started 
college in 2008, Applicant co-signed student loans for his tuition. Around 2010, the son 
stopped going to school and the loans came due. Applicant was unable to pay them and 
his son was unemployed. The resulting $26,799 debt is alleged at SOR 1.a. Applicant 
testified that now that his divorce is complete and his son is gainfully employed, they are 
able and willing to resolve the debt. As of the hearing, he had yet to take any action to 
resolve SOR 1.a. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 34 – 35, 40 – 41, 54 – 55) 
                                                 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the AG, to be effective for all adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. 
In this decision, I have considered and applied the new AG. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Another result of Applicant’s divorce was the delinquent property tax debt alleged 
at SOR 1.d for $1,400. Applicant averred that this occurred because his ex-wife made 
an error in filing her taxes, and that the tax pertains to a small business they co-owned 
until sometime after they separated in 2014. Available information shows that this debt 
was for taxes due in 2012. Applicant averred at hearing that he would resolve this 
matter when he files his tax returns for 2016. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx. 4; Tr. 25, 32 – 33, 50 - 
51) 
 
 From April 1995 until March 2006, Applicant worked for a successful technical 
corporation. When another company bought Applicant’s employer, he received a 
substantial financial severance package that allowed him a measure of financial 
security. In July 2006, encouraged by his technical success and financial comfort, 
Applicant invested in a start-up venture of a new company of which he became 
president. The company was a limited liability company (LLC) of moderate size and 
revenue. While other investors were not active in management of the company, they 
held stock positions superior to Applicant. When the business failed in 2008, there was 
no money left with which to pay overdue unemployment taxes or federal taxes. 
Shareholders with status superior positions avoided liability for the firm’s losses and 
debts. By default, Applicant was left “holding the bag” for the debts listed at SOR 1.b 
and 1.c, which total $137,632. Applicant estimates that he actually owes only about 25 
percent of that total. While he has spoken with the IRS about possible repayment 
arrangements, he has not actually taken action to resolve those debts. (Answer; Gx. 2; 
Tr. 23 – 24, 38 – 39, 55 - 59) 
 
 As alleged in SOR 1.e, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in 
November 2012. He declared about $1.82 million in liabilities against $590,000 assets. 
In addition to personal credit card debts he incurred as part of his business venture, he 
included in the petition the student loans addressed at SOR 1.a and the tax debts 
alleged at SOR 1.b and 1.c. In February 2013, he was discharged of most of the debts 
listed in his petition, but the SOR 1.a – 1.c debts have remained his responsibility. 
(Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 5; Tr. 24 – 26, 37) 
 
 Applicant’s current financial condition is stable. His combined annual income 
from the state university and his consulting work is roughly $124,000. This equates to 
about $10,300 in monthly gross income. Assuming a deduction of 20 percent for taxes, 
he receives at least $8,000 each month. He pays monthly rent of $2,200 and a car note 
of $800. Applicant estimates that all of his other monthly expenses total about $3,000, 
with about $1,000 remaining each month. (Tr. 44 – 48) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
                                                 
3 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
                                                 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government presented sufficient information that reasonably raised a 
security concern about Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s response to the SOR and his testimony at hearing present a 
colorable argument that the debts alleged by the Government arose from circumstances 
beyond his control. SOR 1.b and 1.c are debts remaining from the failure of his 
business in 2011. Because of that failure, he was unable to meet his obligations to pay 
the student loans he co-signed with his son. As to the property tax debt at SOR 1.d, 
Applicant’s position is that it resulted from his recent divorce, even though the debt 
 
 
6 
 
 
relates to the 2012 tax year and Applicant did not separate from his ex-wife until 2014. 
Nonetheless, Applicant’s financial problems, in large measure, occurred under 
circumstances not of his own making. 
 
 To benefit from either AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b), Applicant had to demonstrate that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances and that his financial problems do not 
currently reflect adversely on his judgment and reliability. I am unable to conclude from 
this record that Applicant met his burden for either factor. His financial problems began 
about six years ago when his business failed. Although a great deal of personal debt 
was discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2013, Applicant knew at that time that 
the debts at SOR 1.a – 1.c remained outstanding. As of his hearing in this case, he had 
not yet taken action to address those debts, despite the fact that Applicant has had 
steady income since early 2015. Additionally, he has not acted regarding the property 
tax bill at SOR 1.d. Applicant did not document any of his claims that he has 
approached the IRS about his tax debts, or to support his explanation for why only he 
was left with the SOR 1.b and 1.c debts when his business venture failed. On balance, 
he did not establish a basis for any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions and the security 
concerns under this guideline remain.  
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s failure to address his financial obligations sustains the doubts 
about his suitability for access to classified information raised by the Government’s 
information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these 
adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
