 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07861 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On March 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated September 30, 2014). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 15, 2016. On May 23, 2016, he responded to 
the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on July 19, 2016. The case was 
assigned to me on September 19, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on February 22, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 15, 2017. 
 
During the hearing, three Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3 and one 
Administrative exhibit were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 23, 2017. I kept the record open to enable 
Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that opportunity and timely submitted 
several documents, which were marked and admitted as Applicant exhibits (AE) A 
through AE R, without objection. The record closed on May 3, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.t.) of the SOR, 
although he noted that several of those allegations were duplicates. During the hearing, 
Department Counsel conceded that several of the accounts were duplicates. Accordingly, 
he moved to withdraw ¶¶ 1.r. and 1.t. as duplicates of ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.f., respectively. The 
motion was granted. Upon the closing of the record, it was determined that there were 
other duplicate accounts alleged in the SOR, and those accounts are discussed further 
below. Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an 
engineering technician with his employer since June 2016. He was previously a laborer 
helper with another company from April 2013 until May 2016. He is a 1991 high school 
graduate. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) in January 1993, and he 
served on active duty until he retired as a staff sergeant (E-6) in January 2013.3 Applicant 
was granted a secret security clearance in 2004. Applicant was married in July 2003. 
Applicant has one daughter (born in 2002) and one stepdaughter (born in 2000).  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 AE F (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated January 18, 2013).  
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Military Service, and Awards and Decorations 
 
 During his career, Applicant was deployed to Iraq in support of military operations 
on two separate occasions: February 2006 until September 2006, and August 2008 until 
January 2009. He was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, the 
Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal (two awards), the Marine Corps Good 
Conduct Medal (six awards), the National Defense Service Medal (two awards), the 
Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Iraq Campaign Medal, the Navy Unit 
Commendation, the Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation, the Armed Forces Service 
Medal, the Sea Service Deployment Ribbon (three awards), the Marine Corps Recruiting 
Ribbon, the NATO Medal, a Certificate of Commendation Unit Award, a Certificate of 
Appreciation (two awards), a Letter of Appreciation (five awards), a Meritorious Mast 
(three awards), the Sharpshooter Rifle Qualification Badge, and the Marksman Pistol 
Qualification Badge.4  
 
Financial Considerations5 
 
Applicant’s finances were unremarkable and current during his military service, but 
when he retired, despite having gone through the transition readiness seminar of the DOD 
Transition Assistance Program (DOD TAPS),6 he experienced an unanticipated major 
loss of income. He was unemployed for two months immediately post-retirement, and 
then underemployed for three years as a laborer helper. The household income consisted 
of his military retirement and his wife’s salary, and it was insufficient to cover his normal 
monthly bills. The situation forced him to prioritize his bills. With insufficient income to 
cover all of his bills, accounts became delinquent, and they were placed for collection. 
Various accounts were charged off, and several went to judgment.  
The SOR identified 20 purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, charged off, or filed as judgments, as generally reflected by his October 2014 
credit report or his September 2015 credit report. Those debts total approximately 
$66,039. Their current status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted 
by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are 
described below. These accounts can be divided into two separate groups. The first group 
consists of those accounts that have either been resolved, or are in the process of being 
resolved, or Applicant attempted to resolve, and the status is confirmed with some 
documentary evidence; and the second group consists of those accounts that Applicant 
                                                          
4 AE F, supra note 3. 
 
5 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 1, supra note 1; GE 2 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated October 8, 
2014; GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 9, 2015); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 23, 2016; 
and AE E (Experian Credit Report, dated April 30, 2017). 
 
6 Tr. at 24; The Transition Readiness Seminar (TRS) is a 5-day seminar, which provides transitioning Marines 
and their families with the resources and tools needed to reach their personal goals. The standardized core curriculum 
includes: Resilient Transitions, Military Occupation Specialty Crosswalk, Department of Labor Employment Workshop, 
Department of Veterans Affairs Benefits I and II Briefs, and Financial Planning. See https://dodtap.mil; and 
http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/career/transition-readiness. 
 
4 
                                      
 
acknowledged that he had made no effort to resolve because he has insufficient funds to 
do so.  
The first group of accounts consists of the following:  
SOR ¶ 1.a.: This is a home mortgage for $185,913 that became $5,434 past due 
in 2015, leaving an unpaid balance of $169,442. Applicant contends he made the $5,434 
payment in December 2016, but he failed to submit documentation to support his 
contention.7 He fell behind again in March 2017, and he stated he was about $2,000 
behind in his payments. He contacted the mortgage lender to discuss mortgage 
assistance, but decided not to exercise that option at the time.8 As of February 1, 2017, 
he was again three months past due, but on May 2, 2017, he made a payment of 
$3,446.81 to cover those past-due months.9 As of that date, he again fell behind on one 
payment when he had to use the intended payment to repair his truck. Applicant indicated 
he intended to make his monthly payment later in the month.10 Applicant failed to submit 
any documentation to reflect continuing on-time monthly payments. While he is 
apparently struggling to maintain his timely monthly payments, considering the efforts and 
the degree of success he has accomplished, I conclude that the account is in the process 
of being resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.d.: This is an automobile loan for $35,629 that became $600 past-due, 
leaving an unpaid balance of $7,893 that was placed for collection. Applicant stated that 
the account was in good standing as of April 2016, but the documentation he submitted 
indicated that he had made a $600 payment on May 3, 2017.11 Applicant now contends 
the account is again in good standing, and the remaining balance is $2,700.12 The 
account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.m.: This is a bank-issued credit card for a home improvement store with 
a past-due and unpaid balance of $1,240.97, that was placed for collection and sold to a 
debt purchaser.13 The debt purchaser, in turn, obtained a $1,240 judgment against 
Applicant in 2014. Applicant contended that he had made payments to the county sheriff 
at the courthouse totaling $140 on unspecified dates,14 but he was unable to provide any 
documentation to support his contention. He paid the debt purchaser $95 in May 2016, 
and according to the debt purchaser, after the payment was credited to Applicant’s 
                                                          
7 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 23, 2016, at 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 26-28. 
 
9 AE G (Payment Confirmation, dated May 2, 2017). 
 
10 AE A (Statement, undated), at 1. 
 
11 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1; AE H (Receipt, dated May 3, 2017). 
 
12 AE A, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
13 AE Q (Account Statement, dated January 15, 2014). 
 
14 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1; AE A, supra note 10, at 1-2. 
 
5 
                                      
 
account, the remaining balance of the account was at that point $1,410.97.15 However, 
according to Applicant’s April 2017 credit report, the remaining balance is now $1,106.16 
While the repayment process is far from being a constant monthly endeavor, irregular 
periodic payments made while dealing with limited funds and a number of accounts 
indicates that the account is in the process of slowly being resolved. 
 The second group of accounts consists of the following: 
There is a credit union credit card with a past-due balance of $17,870 that was 
placed for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.b.); there is a recreational merchandise 
(camper or motor home) account with an unpaid balance of $8,644 that was placed for 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.c.); there is a bank-issued store credit card account with an unpaid 
balance of $5,637 that was charged off in the amount of $5,427.33, that subsequently 
went to judgment (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.n.);17 there is a bank-issued electronics store credit 
card account with an unpaid balance of $5,339.69 that was placed for collection and 
charged off. When the store declared bankruptcy, the account was taken over by another 
electronics store. Applicant was offered a settlement for $1,922.29 to $2,082.48 over 
specified payments in 2014, but he did not accept the offer (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.t.);18 there 
is a bank-issued credit card with an unpaid balance of $4,998.64 that was placed for 
collection and sold to a debt purchaser (SOR ¶ 1.g.);19 and there is a bank-issued credit 
card for an electronics store with an unpaid balance of $2,579 that was placed for 
collection and sold to a debt purchaser (SOR ¶¶ 1.h., 1.o., and 1.r.).20  
There is also a bank-issued department store credit card with an unpaid balance 
of $1,941.01 that was placed for collection, transferred to another creditor, and sold to a 
debt purchaser (SOR ¶ 1.i.);21 there is a bank-issued credit card with an unpaid balance 
of $1,517 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.j.); there is a bank-issued department 
store credit card with an unpaid balance of $1,145.71 that was placed for collection and 
sold to a debt purchaser. Applicant was offered a settlement of $802, but he did not accept 
                                                          
15 AE I (Payment Receipt, dated May 2, 2016). 
 
16 AE E, supra note 5, at 8. 
 
17 AE A, supra note 10, at 1; AE J (Account Statement, dated October 1, 2013); AE K (Writ of Execution, dated 
March 16, 2015). Adding to the confusion over duplicate accounts in the SOR, the credit reports reflect two accounts 
issued by the same bank, with one account supposedly with a superstore as having gone to judgment for $5,427, while 
another account supposedly with a toy store, in the same amount, was charged off. I have concluded that both reports 
refer to the same account. 
 
18 AE A, supra note 10, at 1, 3; AE L (Letter, dated June 9, 2014). As noted above, SOR ¶ 1.t. was withdrawn 
as a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.f.  
 
19 AE M (Letter, dated August 2, 2014). 
 
20 AE N (Letter, dated March 4, 2015). As noted above, SOR ¶ 1.r. was withdrawn as a duplicate of SOR ¶ 
1.h. However, it appears that SOR ¶ 1.o. is also a duplicate of the other two for both account numbers are reflected in 
AE N. 
 
21 AE R (Letter, dated May 7, 2014). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
the offer (SOR ¶ 1.k.);22 there is a bank-issued veterinarian credit card with an unpaid 
balance of $906.79 that was placed for collection. Applicant was offered a settlement of 
$816.11, but he did not accept the offer (SOR ¶ 1.l.);23 there is a bank-issued credit card 
for a home furnishing and electronics store with a high credit of $5,207 that was placed 
for collection, charged off, and sold to an unidentified debt purchaser (SOR ¶ 1.p.); there 
is a bank-issued motorcycle store credit card with an unpaid balance of $1,105 that was 
placed for collection, charged off, and sold (SOR ¶ 1.q.); and there is a cable television 
account with an unpaid balance of $364 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.s.). 
Applicant offered conflicting explanations regarding the identity of various 
creditors, and while he correctly identified some duplicate accounts, he misidentified other 
accounts as being duplicates as well. He placed some emphasis on the fact that several 
of the unresolved accounts no longer appear in his April 2017 credit report. There is no 
evidence that he filed disputes with creditors or credit reporting agencies. He also 
acknowledged that he owes several hundred dollars in back income taxes for the tax 
years 2010 through 2015 – a fact that was not alleged in the SOR,24 but may be 
considered by me in his security eligibility assessment. 
During the hearing, Applicant denied ever receiving credit counseling. However, 
since the hearing, it appears that he did meet with someone who assisted him with the 
preparation of his financial report, although there is no evidence if any financial guidance 
was furnished. Applicant submitted a Financial Planning Worksheet to reflect his net 
monthly income; monthly expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available 
for discretionary spending or savings. It reflects a monthly net income of $5,439.30; and 
monthly expenses of $5,262. That would leave a monthly remainder of $177.30. Applicant 
claims to have $2,800 in checking accounts and $5,000 in savings.25 His worksheet does 
not reflect any payments for his delinquent debts. Applicant has taken some limited 
positive steps to resolve some of his accounts, but the vast majority of those accounts 
were simply ignored, and they continue to be ignored. It appears that Applicant’s finances 
are far from being under under control, especially since June 2016 when he obtained a 
new position. 
Character References 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor, who had previously been a coworker, described 
Applicant a having a great work ethic who never sacrifices quality even in times of 
increased workload. He is a good, hardworking and honest person.26 The site lead noted 
                                                          
22 AE O (Letter, undated). 
 
23 AE P (Letter, dated March 6, 2015). 
 
24 Tr. at 42-45. 
 
25 AE B (Financial Planning Worksheet, dated May 2, 2017). 
 
26 AE D (Character Reference, dated May 2, 2017). 
 
7 
                                      
 
that Applicant maintains a very high standard of professionalism when conducting himself 
in the work place. He shows respect, initiative, and motivation.27  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”28 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”29   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”30 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
                                                          
 
27 AE C (Character Reference, dated May 1, 2017). 
 
28 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
29 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
30 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.31  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”32  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”33 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
                                                          
31 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
32 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
33 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) may 
apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. Applicant’s credit reports reflect a number of delinquent accounts that were 
placed for collection or charged off. There were two judgments. The Government is 
entitled to rely on credit reports in these proceedings as ordinary business record 
exceptions to the hearsay rule. There was no evidence submitted “to establish that those 
documents were improperly or irregularly produced, or produced in circumstances that 
would render their reliability suspect.”34 Applicant was mistaken in his belief that he was 
not responsible for accounts that were no longer in his credit reports.  He failed to make 
more than a cursory effort to address a limited number of debts, and he ignored the vast 
majority of the other debts. Applicant’s actions were not because of an unwillingness to 
satisfy his debts, but more like an inability to do so. ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply, but ¶ 19(b) 
does not. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”35 In addition, ¶ 20(e) 
                                                          
34 ISCR Case No. 07-08925 at 3 (App. Bd. September 15, 2008). 
 
35 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
10 
                                      
 
may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
I have concluded that ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) 
do not apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial 
difficulties since Applicant’s retirement from the USMC in 2013 make it difficult to 
conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to 
recur.” As noted above, when he retired, despite having gone through the transition 
readiness seminar of the DOD TAPS, he experienced an unanticipated major loss of 
income. He was unemployed for two months immediately post-retirement, and then 
underemployed for three years as a laborer helper. Those situations were largely beyond 
his control, but they are clearly somewhat stale issues which, over time, or at least since 
June 2016, should have been overcome.  
It is unclear if Applicant obtained financial counseling or merely assistance in 
completing his Financial Planning Worksheet.  There is no evidence that he received any 
guidance to address budgeting, bill management, or eliminating credit card debt. He is 
credited with some very limited efforts to pay some of his creditors. There is little evidence 
that he made good-faith efforts to address his debts over the years since his retirement, 
and especially after June 2016. Applicant has not articulated a plan to address his 
delinquent debts, and the absence of such a plan indicates the absence of any priority to 
timely address those aging debts. There is also an inference that he is simply waiting for 
the debts to drop off his credit reports. There is no indication that Applicant disputed any 
of the debts with the creditors or the credit reporting agencies. 
  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant payment initiatives may provide for the payment of such debts one 
at a time. In this instance, there are no references to a plan; some aborted efforts to make 
some debt payments; and lengthy periods of inactivity. Even with those debts that 
Applicant was given credit for his efforts to resolve, those efforts are spotty at best. He 
makes three months’ worth of payments, and immediately falls one month behind. 
 
Given the inconsistent information pertaining to Applicant’s current finances, it 
remains unclear if he currently has funds remaining at the end of each month for 
discretionary use or savings. He supposedly has a modest remainder, but none of his 
delinquent debts are highlighted for even the most modest of payments. There is little 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are yet under control. Under the 
circumstances, Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to address nearly all of his 
delinquent accounts and by failing to initiate meaningful efforts to work with his older 
 
11 
                                      
 
creditors.36 Applicant’s actions, or relative inaction, under the circumstances cast 
substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.37 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.38   
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected 
information. He candidly acknowledged having some financial difficulties with numerous 
creditors when he completed his e-QIP. He honorably served on active duty with the 
USMC, was deployed to Iraq on two occasions, and was retired honorably. The sole factor 
which Applicant attributes to being the cause of his financial issues was his retirement 
from the USMC and his unanticipated major loss of income. He made some limited good-
faith efforts to resolve a number of SOR accounts.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. A number of accounts in Applicant’s name became delinquent, and were 
placed for collection or charged off. Two judgments were filed. Although he was employed 
                                                          
36 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
37 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
38 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
since June 2016, Applicant made only limited good-faith efforts to resolve some of his 
debts. He simply ignored the vast majority of his delinquent debts. He has not articulated 
a plan to timely address those aging debts.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:39 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding most of the long-standing debts in his name. His 
efforts were hindered, in part, by his employment situation, but once that situation was 
corrected, there was little change in his efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from her financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 
2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:     For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b. and 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:    For Applicant 
                                                          
39 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.e.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i. through 1.l.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:    Duplicate of 1.e. 
Subparagraph 1.o.:    Duplicate of 1.h. 
Subparagraphs 1.p. and 1.q.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r.:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 1.s.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t.:    Withdrawn 
     
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
