 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06535 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 5, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D, Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On April 22, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On April 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 16, 2016. He denied the SOR allegations 
and requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 1.) On August 17, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing eight items, was mailed to Applicant on August 17, 2016, and received by 
 
2 
 
him on August 25, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on 
June 5, 2017. Items 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He is married with two children.  He has an Associate’s 
degree.  He served in the U.S. Air Force from 1974 to 1980.  He is employed with a 
defense contractor as an Engineering Technician.  He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified two debts totaling approximately $34,000.  These debts include a past due 
delinquent private loan account in the amount of $6,048, and a student loan in the 
amount of $27,615.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated May 13, 2015; and March 23, 
2016; reflect that the debts were at that time owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 5 and 6.)   
 
 1(a) Applicant states that his private loan in the amount of $6,048 has been 
written off by the lender and that the other person with whom he has the loan has paid 
the Federal taxes related to it.  The loan account is a joint account that Applicant 
remains responsible for.  (Answer to SOR.)  There is no documentation in the record to 
show that the loan has been paid.     
 
 1(b) Applicant indicates that the student loan is current.  Applicant’s most recent 
credit report dated August 12, 2016, indicates that the debt is paid as agreed with a 
zero balance.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  The Government alleged in the SOR, obviously 
 
3 
 
erroneously, that the debt is in deferment status, which itself does not show poor 
judgment or irresponsibility.  In either case, whether the debt is in deferment, or whether 
it is being paid as agreed, this allegation is found for the Applicant. 
 
Guideline E Personal Conduct 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has 
exhibited conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Of 
special interest is nay failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), dated April 22, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  Section 26, asked if he has  
been over 120 days delinquent on any debt?  The Applicant answered, “No” to the 
question.  The evidence in this case does not prove that Applicant falsified his security 
clearance application.  The Government erroneously alleges that the Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose that he was $1,151 past due with a total approximate 
balance of $25,959 owed on his student loan account,  since the loan was in deferment 
status.  Deferment status means that the Applicant has qualified for the loan to be 
deferred, and that he is temporarily relieved from his obligations under the loan during 
that deferment period.  There is insufficient evidence in the record to prove that 
Applicant was 120 days delinquent on the loan before it was deferred.  This allegation is 
also found for the Applicant.   
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the 
national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that 
 
4 
 
are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
  
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
  
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a delinquent debt that he has not addressed.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. There are none that 
are applicable here.  
  
  In regard to his student loan, I find that since the loan is either in deferment 
status, as alleged by the Government, or is being paid as agreed, as reflected on his 
most credit report, it is not delinquent.  The evidence shows that Applicant has one 
past-due debt that he has not paid that remains owing.  Assuming this debt, the private 
loan, was charged off because Applicant did not pay the debt, Applicant cannot be 
deemed responsible.  In fact, to ignore the debt shows irresponsibility.  His inaction 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in  
AG ¶ 15:       
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) A deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, 
or award fiduciary responsibilities.     
 
 In this case, there is no evidence showing that Applicant falsified his security 
clearance application. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns.  The Financial Consideration 
security concern has not been mitigated.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  For Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
