 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08793 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Attorney At Law 
 
 
July 5, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On November 11, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). (Government Exhibit 1.)  On June 13, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on September 19, 2016.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 9, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 17, 2017. The hearing was 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled.  The Government offered five exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant 
offered seven exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G.  She also 
testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
January  26, 2017. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. She is unmarried with one child.  She has a Master’s 
Degree in Business Management.  She is employed with a defense contractor as a 
Business Analyst.   She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her 
employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified one debt totaling approximately $15,000.  Applicant admits the debt.  (See 
Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)   
 
Applicant explained that in May 2010, after five years of employment, she 
suddenly lost her job.  She blames a recession for her inability to find work.  A year 
passed, and she was still unable to find employment.  During this period, she lived off of 
her savings, and a credit card.  The debt on the credit card grew over the years of 
unemployment where Applicant could no longer afford the monthly payments.  Applicant 
stopped making payments on the debt.  At this point, she was debted to a creditor for a 
delinquent account in the amount of approximately $15,104.  Credit reports dated 
December 2, 2014; August 4, 2016; and January 1, 2017, reflect the debt.  In December 
2014, Applicant found employment.  In early 2015, she contacted the creditor to inquire 
about the debt.  The creditor would not accept a payment plan but was willing to settle 
the debt for about $6,000.  Applicant saved the funds and recently paid the obligation to 
 
3 
 
the creditor.  (Tr. p. 46.)  Applicant provided a copy of the letter from the creditor which 
indicates that the debt has been resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), Standard Form 86 dated November 11, 2014.  Section 26 asked about her 
Financial Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, has she had any account or 
credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?  Applicant 
responded, “NO.”  This was a false answer. 
   
 Applicant stated that she answered the question on the application incorrectly 
because she really needed the job, and she did not want the information concerning her 
debt to have a negative effect on her job.  Applicant also admitted that she deliberately 
lied on is security clearance application to protect her job and because she was 
embarrassed about it.  (Tr. pp. 46 - 47.)  She further admitted that he did not realize the 
harm she was causing by not being truthful.  She rationalized to herself that since she 
had a plan to pay the debt once she got a job, she did not need to reveal it.  
 
 Applicant’s current financial state is stable.  She is current with all of her living 
expenses and regular monthly obligations.  She also has a checking account and two 
retirement accounts.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  She has set up a budget that she is 
following in order to maintain future financial stability.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)   
 
 Letters of recommendation from her supervisor, coworkers, professional 
associates and friends indicate that Applicant is a hardworker, who performs her duties 
with integrity and an excellent attitude.  They found her to be honest and ethical.  She is 
well respected and considered trustworthy.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
 
 Performance Reviews of the Applicant for the period from January 1, 2015, 
through June 30, 2016 are favorable.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  Applicant was also 
recognized on the job with a gift certificate from the Performance Recognition Program.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was delinquently indebted in the approximate amount of $15,000.  She 
lost her job, lived off of her savings and a credit card.  When she stopped making 
payments on her credit card, it became delinquent. Applicant’s actions demonstrate 
both a history of a inability or a unwillingness to satisfy her debt. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating condition under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  It is recognized that Applicant was laid off from work for 4 years, and was unable 
to find employment until December 2014.  At that point, she contacted the creditor and 
tried to set up payment arrangements.  The creditor wanted only a lump sum settlement 
amount and so Applicant diligently saved up her money until she could afford to pay the 
debt.  She resolved the debt on June 29, 2016.  Given these circumstances, there is 
evidence that she has acted reasonably and responsibly.  Her actions demonstrate 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified her security clearance application in response to 
the question regarding her finances.  She did not answer the question truthfully because 
she was embarrassed and wanted to protect her job.  This conduct shows poor 
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness.  There are no applicable conditions that 
could be mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Personal Conduct security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
