 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06258 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2016, and August 5, 2016, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 22, 2016. The 
evidence included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-7 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on August 
30, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file any objections or submit any 
documentary evidence. Items 2-7 are admitted into evidence without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on July 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. The admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 
November 2014. He was unemployed from February until November 2014. From June 
2009 until February 2014, he was employed by a federal contractor. He was 
unemployed from April until June 2009. He is divorced and has a grown child and a 
step-child. He works as an engineering technician. He retired from the Navy after 20 
years of honorable service (1985-2005). He received a bachelor’s degree in 2011.2  
  
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $31,326. The two 
largest debts are from credit cards in the amount of $28,595 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). The 
remaining delinquent debts are for telecommunications and other consumer debt. The 
debts are supported by credit reports from December 2014, July 2015, and August 
2016, Applicant’s statement to a defense investigator in May 2015, and by Applicant’s 
SOR admissions.3 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began when he was unemployed for 10 months in 
2014. His credit reports verify that he began missing payments during this time. 
Applicant stated during his background interview that he set up payment plans on the 
two large credit card debts. The August 2016 credit report corroborates his payment 
claim because it shows he has made 20 months of payments on these two debts, 
thereby substantially reducing the balances. This credit report also has an absence of 
entries reflecting the remaining SOR debts. All the credit reports show that Applicant 
has consistently made timely payments on his student loans, even throughout 2014. 
Applicant has established a track record of making responsible payments since his 
period of unemployment in 2014. Any remaining unpaid debt is of insignificant 
consequence related to a security worthiness determination.4  
                                                          
2 Items 2-3. 
 
3 Items 3, 5-7. 
 
4 Items 3, 7 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts that were unpaid or unresolved. I find all 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant went through a period of unemployment in 2014, which caused him to 
become delinquent on many of his debts. During this time, he did not allow his student 
loans to become delinquent. He has consistently made payments on the two largest 
debts over the past 20 months and substantially reduced the balances of each debt. 
The remaining debts no longer appear on his credit report and are of such small 
balances as to be inconsequential. I find AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his honorable military 
service and his period of unemployment. Applicant established a reliable track record of 
financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
