 
1 
 
  
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03319 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reason (SOR) 
listed 12 collection or charged off delinquent obligations, which totaled more than 
$16,000. He has yet to address his delinquent financial obligations. In 2009 and 2012, he 
was convicted of driving while intoxicated. He has not mitigated the financial 
considerations, criminal conduct, and alcohol consumption security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 24, 2016, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations, criminal 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
conduct, and alcohol consumption security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. On April 1, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
May 18, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing for a hearing convened on June 9, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any documents. The record was kept open 
to allow Applicant to present documents. No documents were received. On June 21, 
2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DIN) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.2 
 
Procedural History 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the subparagraph 
numbers in SOR ¶ 3.a from “1.a through 1.c., above” to “2.a through 2.c., above.” 
Applicant did not object to the motion, which was granted. (Tr. 12)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (SOR Answer), he admitted the delinquent 
obligations, but asserted he had recently paid the debt in SOR 1.k ($395) and was making 
payments on his child support obligation listed in SOR 1.h ($3,186) and the debt listed in 
SOR 1.a ($7,737). He admitted the criminal activity and neither admitted nor denied the 
alcohol consumption allegations. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as factual 
findings. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old data collector who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2014. (Ex. 1, Tr. 14) He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
He has had three periods of unemployment in the recent past. He was unemployed for 
six months from October 2013 through March 2014, for seven months from August 2012 
through February 2013, and for ten months from January 2011 through October 2011. 
(Exs. 1 and 6) One period of unemployment resulted from his decision to move closer to 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
 
3 
 
his son’s location. (Tr. 27, 78) He had been employed in another state. (Tr. 26) Another 
period of unemployment resulted from the company he worked for going out of business. 
(Tr. 27) The third period of employment resulted from losing his job because he lost his 
driver’s license. (Tr. 59)  
 
Applicant has an eight-year-old son with his prior wife, a three-year-old son with 
his current wife, and his current wife has two additional children. (Tr. 83) All of his most 
recent jobs have been temporary jobs. (Tr. 82) His wife works full time and makes $700 
every two weeks. (Tr. 69) 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army National Guard from September 2004 through 
September 2009. (Tr. 21) He was an E-4 at the time of his honorable discharge. In 2005, 
his National Guard unit was called up for three month of duty during the aftermath of 
Hurricane Katrina. (Tr. 24) From October 2008 through July 2009, he served in Iraq. (Tr. 
14) The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) rates Appellant’s disability at 50 per 
cent for post-traumatic stress disorder. (Tr. 57) His disability pay is approximately $1,300 
monthly. (Tr. 57)  
 
In September 2009, when Applicant’s National Guard unit returned from Iraq, he 
was staying in a hotel where the unit was having a return ceremony. (Ex. 6) After the 
ceremony, he and three or four members from his squad went out drinking. (Tr. 24) He 
got lost on the way back to the hotel. He pulled off the road to determine how to proceed 
when a highway patrolman pulled up. The officer noticed the odor of alcohol. Applicant 
said he had only had one drink and one beer, but his blood alcohol content (BAC) was 
.12. (Ex. 6) He had also recently learned his wife was seeing other men while he was 
deployed overseas.  
 
Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), found guilty, 
fined $1,000, sentenced to 270 days confinement (suspended), sentenced to probation 
for nine months, and required to install an interlock device on his vehicle. (Ex. 6, Tr. 16) 
He still has the interlock device on his vehicle. (Tr. 57, 80) The interlock device must stay 
on the vehicle for four years from the date installed. (Tr. 64) It was first installed in early 
2016. (Tr. 64) Had he known of the four-year requirement, he would have had it installed 
much earlier. (Tr. 64)  
 
 In June 2012, Applicant’s ex-wife had taken his son and did not tell him his son’s 
location. Applicant consumed a 6-pack of beer and was stopped while going to the store 
to purchase more beer. (Tr. 56) He was charged with DUI and driving on a cancelled, 
suspended, or revoked license. (Tr.64) He did not know his license had been suspended 
until he was stopped. (Tr. 63) He was found guilty of DUI, fined $3,000, sentenced to one 
year in jail (suspended), required to attend DUI class, attend probation, complete 25 hours 
of community service, and had his driver’s license suspended until 2017. Probation 
required him to check in monthly and pay a $55 fee. (Tr. 40) He asserted he has 
completed his community service requirement. (Tr. 40) At the hearing, Applicant showed 
his current driver’s license, which had been issued in October 2015. (Tr. 69) The sentence 
 
4 
 
was deferred for five years. (Tr. 16) He had agreed to pay $100 monthly on the fine. (Tr. 
16) 
 
 Applicant’s profession was truck driving and he made good money driving in the 
oil fields. (Tr. 23, 82) However, when he lost his license he also lost his commercial 
driver’s license (CDL), which greatly affected his income. (Tr. 82) His CDL has been 
reinstated. (Tr. 61) However, the required interlock device means Applicant can only drive 
his vehicle and is prevented from driving a company’s vehicle. (Tr. 83) This requirement 
limits his job possibilities as a professional truck driver.  
 
 Because of Applicant’s financial problems, he was unable to pay for the required 
DUI class. (Ex. 6) The class cost $360 and an additional amount was charged for the 
victim’s impact panel (VIP). (Tr. 65) In May 2013, a bench warrant was issued for his 
failure to comply with the court directions concerning his 2012 DUI. In June 2013 and July 
2014, additional bench warrants were issued for failure to appear. He stated he was living 
two hours away from the court, did not have a car or driver’s license, and had no other 
way to get to court. (Tr. 42) He asserted he called the court and told them of his problems 
of getting to court, but the bench warrants were still issued. (Tr. 42)  
 
Applicant stated when he was able to attend court, he had $460 remaining to pay 
on his $3,000 fine and obtained a new payment schedule. At that time his probation was 
extended. (Ex. 6) He asserted he attended DUI class twice a week for six weeks. (Tr. 41) 
He asserted he had documentation on his attendance at the most recent DUI class. (Tr. 
55) No documentation concerning class attendance was received.  
 
 In Applicant’s SOR Answer, he admitted to the criminal activities listed in the SOR. 
He indicated he had paid all the fines for his 2009 DUI and was current on his payments 
for the 2012 DUI. (SOR Answer, Tr. 66) He also stated he had appeared in court and 
resolved the bench warrants. He provided no documentation showing his payments were 
current, he had completed DUI class, or that his bench warrants had been resolved.  
 
 In Applicant’s April 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) he listed two delinquent obligations: a cell phone service debt (SOR 1.c, $1,244) 
and past-due child support (SOR 1.h, $3,186). (Ex. 1, Tr. 34) He also listed his September 
2009 and June 2012 DUI convictions. (Ex. 1) Department Counsel acknowledged 
Applicant was paying his child support as agreed and had significantly reduced the 
balance. (Tr. 13) As of May 2016, the delinquent amount had been reduced to $1,900. 
(Ex. 4) Applicant asserted he is current on his support payments, but provided no 
documentation corroborating that assertion. (Tr. 36) He asserted that a wage assignment 
of $75 weekly comes from his pay. (Tr. 37)  
 
 Applicant is now in a custody dispute concerning his son. He has hired an attorney 
who is charging him $4,000 to handle the matter. (Tr. 37)  
 
 In Applicant’s June 14, 2014 Enhanced Subject Interview, he stated he was 
approximately $3,800 behind in his child support obligation (SOR 1.h, $3,186). (Ex. 6) He 
 
5 
 
stated he was behind because he was not working continuously. When working his wages 
are garnished and his tax refunds intercepted and applied to his past-due child support 
debt amounts. (Item 6) He stated he had a $753 telephone service debt (SOR 1.c, 
$1,244). He stated he did not intend to pay this phone bill because he had been double 
charged for some items and charged for equipment and services he did not receive. (Ex. 
6) He asserted he had emails from the company saying the debt had been investigated 
and the overcharging was the company’s fault. (Tr. 50)  
 
 Applicant incurred a second delinquent obligation (SOR 1.e, $388) for cell phone 
service. He asserted he was current when the service provider terminated his service due 
to too many roaming fees. (Ex. 2, 6) He was working in the oil fields, and the service 
provider did not have cell-phone coverage for the area resulting in high roaming fees. (Ex. 
6, Tr. 52) He does not intend to pay the bill.  
 
 When Applicant was discharged from the National Guard, he was informed he was 
indebted to Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) for $7,737 (SOR 1.a), the 
initial amount had been $10,690. (Ex. 4, Tr. 45) While stationed overseas, he had two 
emergency trips home due to his father’s cancer and then death. (Tr. 30, 71) The Red 
Cross paid for the emergency travel, and he has to reimburse the travel costs. (Item 6) 
He agreed the DoD would intercept his income tax returns until the debt was paid. His 
last payment on the debt was in March 2013, when his tax refund was intercepted. (Tr. 
45) In 2012, he had made a few monthly payments of $50 each on the debt. (Tr. 46)  
 
 Applicant owed $1,879 (SOR 1.b) for an apartment debt. (Ex. 6) He was current 
on his rent when he left and speculated this debt might be for clean-up costs. His monthly 
rent was $620, and he believed he did not owe anything when he left because he had 
provided the first and last month’s rent when he moved into the apartment. (Tr. 33) In 
2013, another apartment debt (SOR 1.d, $470) was incurred when he moved from the 
apartment a month before the lease terminated. (Ex. 6, Tr. 34) The company had changed 
the locks, and he was unable to recover his furniture or personal goods. (Tr. 36) He does 
not believe he owes the debt and does not intend to pay it. (Ex. 6)  
 
The debt listed in SOR 1.f ($210) was a loan obtained by Applicant’s ex-wife and 
used to hire an attorney. (Ex. 6) During his interview, he said he did not intend to pay the 
debt. The debt in SOR 1.l ($130) is from a fitness company for gym fees. Applicant does 
not recognize this debt. (Tr. 39) He once had a membership to the gym, but has not 
belonged to a gym in a number of years. (Ex. 6, Tr. 53) He has not received any collection 
calls or letters from this creditor. (Ex. 6)  
 
 The debt in SOR 1.j ($524) was overdraft fees incurred when Applicant’s ex-wife 
took the money from their joint account without informing him of her actions. (Ex. 6, Tr. 
38) He sees the debt as his ex-wife’s debt. The bank debt (SOR 1.k, $395) was a joint 
debt, which he stated he had recently paid. (Ex. 6, Tr. 38) He stated he remembered 
getting a letter stating the debt had been paid. (Tr. 48) At the hearing, he stated he could 
possibly get a statement to show the debt had been paid. (Tr. 47) He provided no 
documentation showing payment of the debt. He does not believe the medical debt (SOR 
 
6 
 
1. I, $78) is his debt. (Ex. 6, Tr. 38) He owes the cable company (SOR 1.g, $133) and 
intends to pay the debt when he is able. (Ex. 6) The cable bill was the result of him not 
returning the cable company’s equipment. He was unable to return the equipment 
because he had been locked out of the apartment by the apartment management. (Tr. 
36) Applicant asserted much of the paperwork related to his debts was lost when he was 
locked out of his apartment. (Tr. 53)  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant claimed to have paid one debt and was making payment 
on two additional delinquent obligations. Department Counsel pointed out Applicant did 
not submit any corroborating documentation as to payment on these obligations. (Tr. 14) 
Applicant indicated he had documentation to support his allegation and would submit the 
material following the hearing. (Tr. 68) No material was received. To Applicant’s credit, 
he acknowledged he had made irrational and hasty decisions in the past, but was 
attempting to correct what he had “messed up.” (Tr. 18) He indicates he is a hard-working 
individual trying his best to do what is right. (Tr. 80) He has made the decision not to drink 
alcohol again. (Tr. 74) He has obtained some counseling from the VA center at the closest 
Army post. (Tr. 56)  
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially overextended is at 
greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other questionable acts to 
generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 19 included three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
any may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 
8 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b) and 19(c). Applicant had owed approximately 
$16,000 on 12 delinquent obligations. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. September 22, 2005). 
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the delinquent obligations except for SOR 1.k ($395), 
which he asserted he had paid. He also said he was making payment on two additional 
delinquent obligations. The majority of his debts remain unpaid. The DFAS debt occurred 
under unusual conditions because he had to return twice from his overseas deployment 
due to his father’s illness and then death. The other delinquent obligations were not 
incurred under unusual conditions and the failure to timely pay those obligations is not an 
unusual condition that is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant asserted he had documentation corroborating his statement that he had 
addressed a number of the delinquent obligations. He asserted some of the 
documentation related to his debts was lost when he was locked out of his apartment. He 
provided insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
 
9 
 
His delinquencies continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
In 2012, Applicant divorced, he was unemployed for ten months from January 2011 
through October 2011, for seven months from August 2012 through February 2013, and 
for six months from October 2013 through March 2014. His divorce, unemployment, and 
having to return from overseas due to his father’s illness and death were circumstances 
beyond his control that impacted his ability to maintain financial stability. However, the 
mitigating impact of his divorce is reduced because it occurred almost five years ago and 
the mitigation from his periods of unemployment was offset by him being employed since 
March 2014. The delinquent obligations have yet to be addressed. He provided no 
documentary evidence of what responsible steps he took to pay or resolve his debts. The 
second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
  
 There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply to 
the majority of his delinquent obligations. He has brought his child support obligation 
current. There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
other delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable 
ongoing plan to pay or resolve his debts. In 2012, he made a few monthly payments of 
$50 each, and in 2013 his tax refund was intercepted and applied to his DFAS debt. He 
has not made any payments on his debts since 2013. He said he paid his bank debt, but 
provide no documentation showing he had done so. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant asserted reasons why he believed he did not owe a number of the 
delinquent accounts. However, he admitted all the debts except for the bank debt, which 
he said he paid. He has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
disputes over these debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
  
There is no documentary evidence Applicant has contacted his creditors and been 
able to establish repayment agreements with his creditors, except for this child support 
obligation which he brought current. An applicant is not required to be debt-free or to 
develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously, but he is required 
to act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent 
to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
 
What constitutes the responsible behavior depends on the facts of a given case. 
Applicant’s poor financial condition originated in part from periods of unemployment and, 
as he stated, he made some irrational and hasty decisions in the past, which he was 
attempting to correct. Applicant must establish a plan to resolve financial problems and 
take significant action to implement the plan, which he has not done.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(b) apply. The SOR alleges and the record establishes 
Appellant was found guilty of a 2009 DUI and a 2012 DUI.  
 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense; 
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. He asserted he complied with the 
court orders related to his two DUIs and that he was current on his payments. However, 
he failed to provide documentation corroborating his compliance. His most recent DUI 
occurred when his ex-wife prevented him from seeing his son. He is currently in a custody 
dispute concerning his son and has employed the assistance of an attorney. But it is 
 
11 
 
uncertain at this time if his ex-wife will continue to cause him problems. It is impossible to 
say problems with his ex-wife are unlikely to recur or that the stress and pressure she has 
caused Applicant are no longer in his life. His most recent DUI occurred in 2012, but the 
most recent bench warrant was issued in July 2014. His DUI’s and bench warrants 
creates doubt about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and raises questions 
about his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. More time must 
elapse without violations of criminal laws before there is enough assurance that criminal 
conduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶ 22 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol3 to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of DUI in 2009 and 2012. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 list four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol use, 
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
                                                          
3 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours, which 
brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. The definition of binge 
drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) National 
Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA Newsletter 3 
(Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/ Newsletter/winter2004/ 
NewsletterNumber3.pdf
 
 
 
12 
 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has no 
previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress in a 
treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along with any 
required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant did not provide enough information to establish mitigation. He did not 
describe any alcohol-related treatment or counseling. He stated he attended DUI class, 
but provided little information about the nature of the class or what he learned from it. He 
stated he stopped drinking after his second DUI in 2012, but provided little information as 
to his reasons for this decision or corroborating statements that he was abstaining from 
alcohol consumption. More time without an alcohol-related incident or binge-alcohol 
consumption or completion of an alcohol counseling program, or corroborating 
statements that he was abstaining from alcohol consumption is necessary to resolve my 
lingering doubts about Appellant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Alcohol consumption security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the “ultimate determination” of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in the U.S. 
Army National Guard from September 2004 through September 2009. From October 
2008 through July 2009, he was deployed to Iraq, a qualified hazardous duty area entitling 
 
13 
 
him to receive hostile fire pay or imminent danger pay. The VA rates his disability at 50 
per cent for post-traumatic stress disorder. His military service in harm’s way in support 
of the United States military merits considerable respect. 
 
Applicant’s most recent DUI occurred in 2012, which is neither remotely distant in 
time nor very recent, but the July 2014 bench warrant is more recent. Additional time and 
more information as to successful rehabilitation could mitigate the criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption concerns.  
 
Applicant has yet to address the majority of his delinquent obligations. The issue 
is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise 
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. See AG ¶¶ 2(c) and 2(d). Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Alcohol Consumption: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
