 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04946 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
July 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on nine debts totaling $11,246. All of the 
alleged debts are resolved. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 27, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on December 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was decided 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
19, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on December 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2017. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
7. GE 1 and GE3 through GE 6 were admitted without objection. Applicant objected to 
GE2, but that objection was withdrawn after Applicant offered clarifications on that 
document (Tr. 54.), and it was admitted. GE 7 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. 
(Tr. 14.) Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented five documents, 
which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E. AE A through AE E were 
admitted without objection. The record was left open until February 21, 2017, for receipt 
of additional documentation. On February 21, 2017, Applicant presented AE F through 
AE L, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on February 23, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor for 12 years. He has held a security clearance 
since 2005. He is married, and has one adult son. Applicant and his son have the same 
first, middle, and last names, with the exception that Applicant is “senior” and his son is 
“junior.” (GE 1; AE D; AE E; Tr. 18-20, 44.) 
  
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on nine debts totaling $11,246. These 
debts appear on credit reports in evidence. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a city on three delinquent debts, each 
totaling $65 (or $195 collectively) in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. Applicant explained that 
these debts were for dog licenses from his city government in 2013 that were 
inadvertently overlooked. Applicant provided documentation that shows these debts 
were paid in full on February 7, 2017. These debts are resolved. (AE J; Tr. 27-29, 46.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a timeshare account in the amount of 
$8,966 in SOR ¶ 1.d. When he signed the contract for the timeshare, he was told his 
monthly payments would be $200 to $300. He was not aware that he would be charged 
maintenance fees on top of his monthly payments. He could not afford the additional 
costs. He fell behind on the account in 2011. Applicant and his wife never used the 
timeshare property. His wife attempted to arrange payments to resolve the delinquency, 
but was told that the debt had been cancelled. Applicant presented documentation 
showing the debt as “closed/cancelled” and a zero balance. This debt is resolved. (AE 
A; AE K; Tr. 29-33, 47.) 
  
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a vehicle impound fee in the amount of 
$1,711 in SOR ¶ 1.e. The vehicle in question belonged solely to Applicant’s adult son. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s son signed an affidavit to that effect and provided proof he paid this debt. 
This debt is resolved. (GE 5; AE F; AE G; Tr. 33-34, 48-51.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a city on four delinquent parking tickets placed for 
collections in the amounts of $94, $94, $92, and $94, respectively, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.f through 1.i. These debts were incurred by Applicant’s son on his personal vehicle. 
Applicant’s son’s signed affidavit took sole responsibility for these debts, and provided 
documentation that they were paid. These debts are resolved. (AE F; AE G; Tr. 34-35, 
51.)  
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquencies to his wife’s mismanagement of their 
accounts. He now monitors their finances personally, to make sure all debts are being 
paid in a timely manner. (Tr. 52.) He will not purchase a timeshare again. (Tr. 47.) 
Applicant and his wife completed financial counseling with a nonprofit credit agency on 
February 7, 2017. (Tr. 52-53.) A cash flow analysis provided by Applicant shows he has 
a total net monthly income of $7,500 and monthly expenses of $4,975. He has assets 
valued at $750,000 and liabilities of $551,500. (AE H; AE I.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations reflect he is a valued employee who meets 
expectations. (AE B.) He has received a number of performance based awards. (AE C.) 
Applicant’s colleague indicated that Applicant is honest, loyal, and dependable. (AE L.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant was alleged to be indebted on nine debts totaling $11,246. Five of 
those delinquent debts were not his, but belonged solely to his son, who bears the 
same name. Those debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.i) are found in Applicant’s favor, 
because they do not raise a security concern. However, Applicant’s four outstanding 
debts set out in SOR ¶¶ 1.a though 1.d, do raise the above concerns. His largest debt, 
owed on the timeshare property, became delinquent in 2011 and the dog license fees 
became delinquent in 2013. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant and his wife completed financial counseling from a non-profit 
counseling service. Applicant paid three debts and initiated a good-faith effort to make 
payment arrangements on the fourth debt, but was told by the creditor that the account 
had been cancelled and had a zero balance due. Therefore, there are clear indications 
from the evidence he presented that his financial problems are under control. All of the 
SOR-listed debts are resolved. AG ¶¶ 20 (c) and 20 (d) have application to SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
though 1.d. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
respected by his colleague, who wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He performs well at 
his job. He has completed credit counseling and now maintains a close watch on his 
credit report. Applicant will not purchase a timeshare property again. Applicant’s son 
has resolved the delinquencies that were wrongly attributed to Applicant.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
