 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-05064 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel1 
Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  
Leon J. Schachter, Esquire 
Bigley Ranish LLP 
 
July 31, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant paid the one alleged past-due debt in 2011, and filed both of his 
delinquent tax returns. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on September 22, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On December 29, 
2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued 
                                                 
1 Ms. De Angelis only appeared at the June 21, 2016 hearing. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.2 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on February 3, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on March 16, 2016. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an initial Notice of Hearing by 
video tele-conference on May 9, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 9, 
2016. Due to technical issues the hearing was continued. A second Notice of Hearing 
was issued on September 14, 2016, and the hearing was held in person on November 7, 
2016. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through W, which were admitted 
without objection, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the final transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on December 9, 2016.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 27 years old and, at the time the hearing began, was employed by a 
defense contractor. He served on active duty with the Marine Corps from 2005 through 
2009. Applicant is married and has one child. He is seeking to obtain national security 
eligibility for a security clearance. He has held a security clearance at various times during 
both his military and civilian careers. (Applicant Exhibits B and C.)   
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a past-due debt, and has not filed two Federal tax returns in a timely 
fashion. Therefore he is potentially unreliable, untrustworthy, or at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted in part and denied in part allegations 1.a and 1.b 
in the SOR with explanations. He admitted allegation 1.c with explanations. He also 
submitted additional evidence to support his request for a finding of national security 
eligibility. 
                                                 
2 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he did not file his 2010 Federal tax return in a timely 
fashion. At that time Applicant had just left the Marine Corps, but was still working 
overseas as a civilian contractor. He attempted to file his tax return electronically for that 
year, but due to technical issues was unable to do so. He has since filed that tax return, 
which would have given him a substantial refund if filed on time. Applicant admits that this 
procrastination was his fault. (Applicant Exhibits N and O; Tr. 35-38, 47-49.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that he did not file his 2008 Federal tax return in a timely 
fashion. At that time he was stationed overseas in the Marine Corps. Due to work 
requirements, and his own fault, Applicant was unable to get his tax return prepared and 
filed in a timely fashion. He has since filed that tax return, which would have given him a 
refund. Applicant admits that procrastination was his fault. (Applicant Exhibits L and M; 
Tr. 31-35, 43-47.) 
 
 With regard to his taxes, Applicant submitted documentation showing that he has 
filed his taxes in a timely fashion for 2009, and 2011 through 2015. He recognizes his 
personal responsibility to make sure his taxes are filed in a timely fashion in the future. 
(Applicant Exhibits A, S, T, U, V, and W; Tr. 35, 50-51.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he was indebted for a past-due credit card debt in the 
amount of $3,020. Applicant provided evidence showing he paid this debt off in 2011. 
(Applicant Exhibits P and Q; Tr. 25-31.) 
  
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. He makes a substantial income, 
and the most recent credit reports in the record show no delinquent accounts. 
(Government Exhibit 4; Applicant Exhibits J and K.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant provided five letters of recommendation from people who know him in 
the defense industry. All the writers have knowledge of the allegations in the SOR. He is 
described as being “honest, trustworthy and a great American citizen” by one writer, who 
is also Applicant’s unit security manager. (Applicant Exhibit E.) Applicant’s Exhibit D is 
from Applicant’s current supervisor. The writer states, “[Applicant] has proved to be an 
honest and reliable employee.” The other three letters are of a similar nature. (Applicant 
Exhibits F, G, and H.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had one past-due debt, and he did not file two years of Federal tax 
returns. All three of these conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate them. 
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant paid the single past-due debt alleged in the SOR in 2011. He has filed 
both of the Federal tax returns, albeit considerably late. However, he presented evidence 
that he has been consistently paying his taxes for several years since 2010. These 
incidents are aberrations, and he submitted compelling evidence that they will not happen 
again. His current financial status is stable, and he evinces a credible intent and ability of 
being able to maintain that stability into the future, including paying his taxes in a timely 
fashion. He has fully mitigated all the allegations in the SOR. Paragraph 1 is found for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and a 
security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
