                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 15-01381 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 25 February 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 11 July 2016, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional documents. DOHA assigned the case to me 22 May 2017.
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-6 .1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017. 
1
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.a-1.b. He is a
49-year-old electrician sponsored for a clearance by a U.S. defense contractor since
November 2011.  He has not previously held a clearance.3
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits (Items 3-6) establish, seven
delinquent debts totaling over $26,000. Applicant admits five debts totaling about
$22,000, but claims, without corroboration, that he paid two debts totaling $21,500
(SOR 1f-1.g) in 2010. He denies two debts totaling $4,700, but states a willingness to
pay the debts if they can be shown to be his. Applicant disclosed no delinquent
accounts on his July  2015 clearance application (Item 2), and was confronted with all
the SOR debts during an August 2015 interview with a Government investigator (Item
3), based on his July  2012 credit report (Item 4). He told the investigator that he would
research the delinquent debts and resolve them. The accounts have begun to disappear
from his January and September 2015 credit reports (Items 5, 6), which may be due to
the fact that those credit reports are single-bureau reports, or the accounts may be
aging off the reports.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his alternating periods of
unemployment. However, he has documented no contacts with his creditors since his 
August 2012 interview, his March 2016 Answer, or his May 2016 FORM.
      Applicant provided no confirmation of his claimed payments, or of any contacts
with his creditors to either dispute or arrange payment on the accounts. He provided no
budget or financial statement. He has not documented any financial or credit
counseling. He provided no work or character references, or any evidence of community
involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
According to Applicant’s July 2012 clearance application (Item 2), the last time Applicant worked more than3
a year for the same employer was September 2001 to October 2005, when he was also employed as an
electrician. Since October 2005, his work pattern has been periods of unemployment ranging from weeks to
months, followed by jobs lasting from weeks to months. Sometimes, he has strung two or three jobs together
consequetively. The job that required this clearance ended in May 2012, but the company continues to
sponsor Applicant. After this job ended in May 2012, Applicant had several more alternating periods of
unemployment/employment, up to his August 2012 interview with a Government investigator (Item 3). 
2
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of
financial difficulties for which he has documented no resolution since at least July 2012.5
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations, 
given that he has not acted to address them. Moreover, his alternating unemployment
continues, and he has provided no evidence that his employment will be steadier if he
obtains his clearance.  Certainly, alternating unemployment can be circumstances6
beyond his control, but in this case, part of the vicissitudes of his work, and his inaction
since at least July 2012 has been irresponsible.  Applicant has had no credit or financial7
counseling, and there is no evidence any of the debts are being resolved.  Further, his8
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; (c) a history5
of not meeting financial obligations;
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear8
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
3
lack of effort does not constitute a good-faith effort to address his debts.  Accordingly, I9
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
¶20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise9
resolve debts.
4
