 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-08681 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for access to classified information. She failed to present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from a history of financial 
problems, which includes a 2009 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case and unreleased federal tax 
liens filed in September 2011 and March 2014 for $34,899 and $24,121, respectively. 
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on April 15, 2015. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on June 10, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
 
2 
 
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2016. She requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Her response included a one-page 
memorandum in which she explains her financial problems.    
 
On October 25, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it November 4, 2016. She did not reply within 30 days from 
receipt of the information as required. The case was assigned to me July 3, 2017.    
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 4, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the September 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required 
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.1 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 
prohibits receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating 
witnesses. The Directive provides no exception to the authentication requirement. 
Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits 
consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the written record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that she understood the 
implications of waiving an objection. Accordingly, given the lack of an authenticating 
witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my decision.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for her 
employment as a federal contractor. She has worked as a technical writer and editor 
since September 2013. Before that, she was unemployed for about four months. Before 
that, she worked for a federal contractor as a self-employed consultant and research 
analyst from April 2003 to April 2013. She married in 1993 and divorced in 1997. She 
has two adult children and one minor child.  
                                                          
1 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
 
3 
 
 
In her April 2015 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed a number of 
financial issues as follows: (1) a 2009 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case; (2) failure to pay an 
estimated $60,000 in federal income tax stemming from her period of self-employment; 
and (3) a repossession of an automobile.2 She explained the repossession stemmed 
from an accumulation of medical bills during a period when she did not have medical 
insurance.  
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems consisting of 15 items as follows: 
(1) the 2009 Chapter 7 bankruptcy; (2) two unreleased federal tax liens, filed in 
September 2011 and March 2014, for $34,899 and $24,121, respectively; and (3) 12 
collection, past-due, or charged-off accounts for a total of about $26,204. Three of the 
12 delinquent accounts appear to be medical collection accounts for a total of about 
$836. All 15 items are established by credit reports from May 2013, December 2015, 
and October 2016.3 There is no documentation in the written record to establish that the 
federal tax liens are in a payment arrangement with the IRS. Nor is there documentation 
showing that the 12 delinquent accounts were paid, settled, in a payment arrangement, 
cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant explained the following circumstances 
surrounding her financial problems: 
 
In 2008, I was working but unable to get health insurance because of a 
minor pre-existing condition. That year, I was diagnosed with cancer 
(Melanoma). I was raising three boys and provided the only household 
income. I had to pay taxes for my consulting income and fell behind. The 
expenses for treatment led me to declare bankruptcy in 2009. 
 
A year after the cancer was gone, I started getting sick again. It took years 
and many specialists to diagnosis the autoimmune disease. In 2012, the 
day after my son graduated from high school, I moved to a part of the 
country where the cost of living was lower. It wasn’t until mid-2013 that I 
got a job with [the employer] and was offered health benefits, but 
unfortunately my expenses continued to exceed my income. 
 
I spoke with a lawyer, and bankruptcy again seems like the only option, 
but it is too soon to file so I just do what I can in the meantime.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
                                                          
2 Exhibit 3.  
 
3 Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.  
 
 
4 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.4 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.5 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”6 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.7 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.8 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.9 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.10 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.11 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.12 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.13 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.14 
                                                          
4 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
10 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
5 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.15 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f) . . . failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required;   
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic 
financial history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. To start, she is 
indebted to the IRS based on two tax liens for a total of $59,020. With accrual of interest 
and the possibility of penalties, it is likely she owes even more in back taxes. Failure to 
pay income tax as required by law bears close examination and is a matter of serious 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
concern.16 Second, she is also indebted on 12 delinquent accounts for about $26,000. 
Although it appears Applicant has had serious medical issues over the years, which are 
circumstances beyond her control, only 3 of the 12 delinquent debts are medical 
collection accounts for less than $1,000 in total. All 12 of the delinquent debts are 
unresolved.   
 
 What’s missing here is documentation that Applicant initiated and is adhering to a 
good-faith effort to pay or settle what she owes to her various creditors. Also missing is 
documentation that she has made a payment arrangement with the IRS to resolve the 
two tax liens and that she is in compliance with the arrangement. Without such 
documentation, I can only conclude that Applicant has not met her burden of production 
because she did not present sufficient documentation showing she is taking affirmative 
steps to resolve her financial problems. Based on her answer to the SOR, it appears 
she is simply waiting until she can discharge her debts via another Chapter 7 
bankruptcy case, which is not indicative of good faith, and which will not provide her any 
relief from the federal tax liens.  
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems creates doubt about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
16 The General Accountability Office (GAO) expressed serious concern over the relationship between tax 
delinquents and clearance holders in its July 28, 2014 report, Security Clearances: Tax Debts Owed by 
DOD Employees and Contractors, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665052.pdf. 
 
