 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03991 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 22, 2014. On 
November 21, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 adjudicative guidelines. 
The SEAD 4 AGs apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. My decision is based 
on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes resulting from issuance of 
SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 29, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on August 12, 2016. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 8, 2016. He submitted a 
written response and a credit report in response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 5), and the Applicant’s exhibits (AE) collectively marked 
as AE A, are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old truck driver employed by a defense contractor since 
1981. He was married in 2005 and does not have children. He has held a security 
clearance since 2004. He reported several delinquent credit card accounts and a time-
share in default. 
 
The SOR alleges consumer credit and medical debts totaling about $77,674. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant denied five medical accounts and a small consumer 
account. He admitted the large credit card accounts and one he claimed to be in a 
repayment status. No other documentation was provided with his answer. In response to 
the FORM, he claimed to have payment arrangements for a small collection account and 
one of the credit card accounts. He noted that he paid two vehicle loans, and a bank 
account, but did not provide evidence of such payments except for a credit report, dated 
September 8, 2016. He also claimed to be unable to resolve three large credit card 
accounts and a collection agency account because the creditors would not accept the 
amount he was offering to pay.  
 
The credit report he provided shows four significant credit card accounts still in 
collection or charged off; one of the vehicle loans that Applicant claimed was resolved 
was actually transferred to collection (SOR ¶ 1.c) and remains unresolved; and the other 
vehicle loan appears to be paid (SOR ¶ 1.g). Applicant did not show that the medical 
debts have been resolved or that other debts that he claimed are in payment plans, have 
been or are being resolved. 
 
 Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into these allegations, or evaluate his demeanor 
or credibility in response to questions about his claims of debt resolution and current 
financial status. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
 
3 
 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
 
4 
 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the case file are sufficient 
to establish the disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, and there is insufficient 
evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely 
to recur. He asserts that he has resolved some of the debts through payments or 
installment plans, but he did not provide sufficient evidence to support his assertions. 
Even if he was able to show resolution of the debts as he claimed, he continues to have 
significant unresolved delinquent accounts. Additionally, he did not show how his financial 
condition became so distressed as to acquire significant delinquent debts, nor did he 
show adequate efforts to resolve them, given his long work history. He presented no 
evidence showing his current financial condition or that he sought financial counseling. 
His financial situation is not under control and his history of incurring substantial 
delinquent debt raise serious questions about his judgment and willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. Overall, no mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has not 
shown how he became financially distressed, that he has adequately addressed his 
continued delinquent accounts, and that he is now financially stable. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue his eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
6 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f; 1.h – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
