 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ------------------------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 16-01585 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He failed to present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from an unpaid judgment for 
$28,567, filed in June 2008, based on a delinquent credit card account. He did not 
present sufficient documentation to establish that he contacted the creditor who 
received the judgment and made arrangements to pay or settle what he owes. 
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on February 5, 2015.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on June 8, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
2 
 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 26, 2016. His response consisted of a one-
page memorandum; he admitted the single factual allegation; and he requested a 
decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. His response did not include 
supporting documentation.   
 
On August 4, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it August 23, 2016. He timely replied on September 6, 2016, 
with a one-page memorandum without supporting documentation. The case was 
assigned to me July 3, 2017.    
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the April 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required 
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 The Directive provides no exception to the 
authentication requirement. Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to 
the general rule that prohibits consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. In his response to the FORM, Applicant objected to the ROI 
based on lack of authentication. The objection is sustained. Accordingly, given the lack 
of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my decision.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his 
employment as a federal contractor. He has worked as a painter for a company doing 
business in the defense industry since 2003. He married in 1990 and divorced in 2001. 
He married for the second time in 2008. He has a 20-year-old son.  
 
                                                          
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
 
3 
 
In his February 2015 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he 
had an unpaid $28,567 judgment stemming from a credit card account. He explained 
that he was unable to pay due to his divorce and the account was overcharged by his 
former spouse. He further stated that the judgment was due to be removed from his 
credit report in May 2015.3  
 
A March 2015 credit report, which was obtained during the background 
investigation, also establishes the unpaid judgment.4 The credit report shows that the 
unpaid $28,567 judgment was filed in June 2008, and the judgment creditor is a large, 
well-known bank that does business in the credit card industry. The credit report also 
reflects a single paid collection account and 11 accounts (some open and some closed) 
that are paid as agreed and in good standing. In other words, the unpaid judgment is 
the only derogatory item currently on Applicant’s credit report.  
 
In his June 2016 answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for the 
unpaid judgment. He stated that he intended to pay the judgment in full upon sale of his 
property, which he was in the process of preparing to put on the market for sale. He 
further stated that he lives within his financial means; that he is an upstanding tax-
paying citizen; and that he does not have a felony conviction. He attributed the unpaid 
judgment to his first marriage, but accepted responsibility for it. In his August 2016 
response to the FORM, he stated that there was no documentation of any payment 
arrangements for the judgment because he was told (by the judgment creditor, 
presumably) that the judgment had to be paid in full and he was not informed of other 
payment options. Accordingly, there is no documentation in the record to establish that 
the judgment was paid, settled, in a payment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, vacated, 
satisfied, or otherwise resolved.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.5 
 
                                                          
3 As I understand the law concerning credit reports, a judgment is allowed to remain on a consumer’s 
credit report for seven years from the filing date. Nevertheless, generally speaking, judgments are 
enforceable (subject to collection) for ten years (and longer in some states) from the filing date. Also, 
many states allow the judgment creditor to renew, re-file, or revive the judgment before the expiration of 
the initial ten-year period if the judgment is not satisfied.    
 
4 Exhibit 4.  
 
5 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
 
4 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.6 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”7 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.8 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.9 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.10 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.11 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.12 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.13 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.14 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
                                                          
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
5 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.16 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
  AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic 
financial history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. He is indebted 
on an unpaid $28,567 judgment filed in June 2008. With the accrual of interest over the 
last seven years, it’s safe to say he now owes a larger sum to the judgment creditor. 
The judgment remains wholly unresolved, and he presented only a generalized plan, 
without supporting documentation, to resolve it. He attributes the judgment to his first 
marriage when his then spouse overcharged the underlying credit card account. I note 
that the divorce occurred in 2001 and the judgment was filed about seven years later in 
2008. Given that circumstance, it is difficult to connect the divorce to the judgment 
without supporting documentation. Regardless, even if a connection were shown, 
Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances, because he has done 
essentially nothing since June 2008 to resolve the judgment.   
 
 What is missing here is obvious: Documentation that Applicant initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to pay or settle what he owes to the judgment creditor. It’s 
the responsibility of the individual applicant to produce relevant documentation in 
support of their case. Here, Applicant has not met his burden of production because he 
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
did not present sufficient documentation showing he is making a good-faith effort to 
resolve the unpaid judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems creates doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden 
of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
