 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01238 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 30, 2015. On 
June 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The 
changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 16, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 25, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on August 
31, 2016, but did not respond. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.d. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c. His admissions in are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old logistics management analyst employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2003. He graduated from college in May 1994 with a 
bachelor’s degree. He married in July 1994. He and his wife have four children, ages 
23, 20, 16, and 14. He received a security clearance in August 2004. 
 
 Applicant’s October 2015 credit bureau report (CBR) reflected two judgments 
filed against him in July 2012 for $4,883 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and in June 2014 for $2,770 (SOR 
¶ 1.a). Both judgments were obtained by the homeowners’ association for Applicant’s 
neighborhood, and both are unsatisfied. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he had 
a payment agreement for both judgments and that a copy of the payment agreement 
was attached to his answer. No documents were attached to his answer. In the FORM, 
Department Counsel specifically pointed out that no payment agreements were 
attached to the answer. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
 Applicant’s March 2015 and June 2016 CBRs reflect a delinquent medical bill for 
$148 (SOR ¶ 1.c). In the March 2015 CBR, the creditor is not named and the collection 
agency is not identified. In the June 2016 CBR, the creditor is listed as “Medical/Health 
Care” and the account owner is listed as “Individual account.” There is no contact 
information listed in either CBR. The debt became delinquent in March 2010 and was 
referred for collection in November 2010. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 
this debt and stated that he was unable to find this debt in his credit report. He stated 
his intention to pay it if he receives a bill for it. There is no evidence that he has disputed 
the debt with any of the credit bureaus or has attempted to identify the creditor. 
 
 Applicant’s October 2015 CBR listed a credit-card account charged off for $6,555 
in April 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.d). He admitted the debt, stated that the account was opened 
without his knowledge, and stated that he “had been back and forth with the original 
account holder.” The March 2015 and June 2016 CBRs reflect that he is an authorized 
user on this account.  
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
 4
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Applicants have the “ultimate burden” of demonstrating that they meet the 
qualifications for a security clearance. ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant is an authorized user on the account alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d. As such he is not legally liable for payment of the amount due. However, 
his admissions and the evidence in the FORM establish the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.c and raise the three disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
 5
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve 
the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant has not submitted sufficient information 
to determine whether any of the debts alleged in the SOR were due to conditions 
beyond his control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling and his financial situation is not under control 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of payments on 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.d. In his answer to the SOR, he claimed that he 
had a payment arrangement for the judgments alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.b, but his 
answer did not include any documents reflecting an agreement. Applicant had an 
opportunity to document any payment agreements when he received the FORM, which 
specifically pointed out the lack of documentation, but he did not avail himself of this 
opportunity. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are 
expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. 
ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). Applicants who claim that debts 
have been resolved are expected to present documentary evidence supporting their 
claims. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.c, he has not attempted to identify the creditor and he has not disputed the debt with 
any of the credit bureaus. He claimed that the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was 
opened without his knowledge, and he admitted it in his answer to the SOR. His March 
2015 and June 2016 CBRs reflect that he is an authorized user on the account and not 
 
 6
legally liable for the debt. However, he has not disputed it with the creditor or any of the 
credit bureaus. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
