 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02611 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 26, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 6, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I were offered 
and admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until June 20, 
2017, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. She submitted documents that 
were marked as AE J through L. They were admitted into evidence without objection, 
and the record closed.2 DOHA received the hearing transcript on June 14, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.c.3 After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. She attended college from 1991 to 1994, but did not 
earn a degree. She enlisted in the Air Force, served from 1994 to 1998, and received an 
honorable discharge. She attended college from 2004 to 2008, obtaining a bachelor’s 
degree in 2006 and a master’s degree in 2008. She married in 2007. Her husband has 
five children ages 26, 24, 23, 22, and 21. Applicant stated the youngest child moved out 
of their residence in July 2016. She does not have biological children. Applicant has 
been employed since 2003. Her annual salary has ranged from $84,000 beginning in 
2003 to $112,000 in 2015 and $121,000 in 2016. She earned substantially more in 2016 
due to overtime.4  
 
In 2009, Applicant’s husband accepted an early retirement from his employer and 
received a lump-sum payment of $50,000 that he used to start a small business. Around 
that time his sons got into trouble, and he became depressed and stopped working. His 
business subsequently failed and he started consuming alcohol and drugs. Applicant’s 
husband was unemployed for two to three years. He worked sporadically for several 
months. In October 2016, he began a full-time job.5 
 
 To finance her college education, Applicant obtained student loans beginning in 
1991. She testified that while in the Air Force her loans were deferred, but she did not 
know for how long. She stated that she made sporadic payments from 1998 to 2004, 
but did not pay her loans consistently. She did not provide supporting documents. While 
attending college from 2004 through 2008, she obtained more student loans. She stated 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
3 Applicant did not admit or deny SOR ¶¶ 1.s or 1.z in her answer to the SOR. She admitted those 
allegations on the record.  
 
4 Tr. 22-30. 
 
5 Tr. 25-27. 
 
3 
 
 
that around 2009, she had a regular payment plan and paid $300 on one loan and $100 
on another. She made those payments for nine months. She did not provide 
substantiating documents. During that time, two stepchildren got into legal trouble and 
she paid their legal fees because her husband was not working. He used some of the 
family funds to pay for furniture. Applicant stated she was trying to pay all bills for the 
household on her income.6  
 
 Applicant testified that from 2009 to October 2016 she made some payments 
toward other student loans and may have made consecutive payments for some period 
between 2012 and 2014, but did not make payments after 2014. No supporting 
documents were provided. Applicant defaulted on her student loans and the loans are in 
collection accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.r). After receiving the SOR, Applicant made 
arrangements with the collection company to rehabilitate the loans beginning in 
February 2017. Based on her income, she is required to make nine consecutive 
payments of $485. She provided proof that she has made payments from February to 
June 2017. After the loans are successfully rehabilitated, they will be transferred back to 
the Department of Education. The total balance owed as of February 2017 is $122,211.7  
 
Applicant stated that she hired a law firm that is disputing her delinquent 
accounts.8 In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted she owed the medical debt in SOR ¶ 
1.a ($125). At her hearing, she stated this account was paid. She provided an internal 
document from the law firm titled “credit report removals,” which listed this creditor. 
Having admitted she owed the account, Applicant did not provide evidence that the 
account was paid, or that it was removed from her credit report because it was paid. 
She also did not provide a copy of her credit report showing it was removed. The debt is 
unresolved.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($495) is a medical debt owed for services from 2012. 
Applicant stated she failed to pay the bill due to an oversight. She disputed the bill with 
the collection company, and it was verified by the original creditor. She provided a 
document to show she made a $248 payment toward the balance of the debt on June 5, 
2017. She did not provide additional documentation that the remaining balance was 
satisfied. It is not resolved.10 
 
Applicant stated that the law firm sent a letter to the creditor disputing that she 
owed the account in SOR ¶ 1.c ($385) for cable services. She admitted she had an 
account with the company. She is waiting to learn of the results of the dispute from the 
                                                          
6 Tr. 48-55, 60. 
 
7 Tr. 55-61; AE A, B. 
 
8 Tr. 70-72; AE F. 
 
9 Tr. 74; AE G. 
 
10 Tr. 64, 75; AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
law firm.11 This debt is unresolved. The law firm counseled Applicant over the phone 
about making a budget. She indicated she has a spreadsheet reflecting her debts.12  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.s ($1,492) and 1.t ($1,013) are for medical services from 
2014. She received the bills, but forgot to pay them due to oversight. She stated she is 
making $100 payments toward each debt. Her documents support payments made in 
April and May 2017 and a previous payment of $40 toward each debt.13 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.x ($88). It was 
incurred in 2012, and she did not pay it due to an oversight. The document she provided 
shows that she disputed the debt with the collection company and it was verified with 
the original creditor. Applicant paid the account in April 2017.14 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.z 
($70) owed for a medical debt incurred in December 2014 was paid in April 2017. A 
supporting document was provided.15 
 
 Applicant testified that she was unfamiliar with the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.v, 1.w, 1.y, and 1.aa through 1.ff. She stated she used a credit report to review her 
debts instead of the SOR.16 
  
Post-hearing, Applicant provided a document that verified on June 19, 2017, she 
paid the balance owed for the delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.y ($76). She also provided a 
statement that she had made payment arrangements for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.v ($146) 
and 1.w ($113) to be paid from her account in July 2017, but the creditor would not 
provide her a letter showing her plan. She stated in a post-hearing letter that she is 
unable to contact the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.u ($436) because the telephone 
numbers for the collection agency are disconnected. She asked the law firm to contact 
them, and they too have been unsuccessful. She attempted to call collection agencies 
with the same name, located in different states, but no accounts with her name were 
found.17 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant provided documents verifying that on June 8, 2017, she 
paid the balance owed for the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.aa ($61), 1.bb ($61), 1.cc 
($61) 1.dd ($61), 1.ee ($52), and 1.ff ($45).18  
                                                          
11 Tr. 75-77; AE G. 
 
12 Tr. 98. 
 
13 Tr. 65-68; AE E.  
 
14 Tr. 62-64; AE C, E. 
 
15 Tr. 82-83; AE E. 
 
16 Tr. 77-79. 
 
17 Tr. 79-80; AE K, L. 
 
18 AE J. 
 
5 
 
 
 When questioned about her income and current financial situation, Applicant 
admitted she owes approximately $2,000 to $3,000 in federal income taxes for tax year 
2016. She also may owe state and federal income taxes for 2015 and 2014. She 
received a letter from the IRS in 2017, stating that she owed approximately $5,000 for 
taxes owed for tax year 2012. It advised her that when the total amount owed was 
determined, a payment plan would be discussed. She and her husband do not file their 
tax returns jointly.19 
   
 Applicant does not have credit cards. She is current on car loans for a 2014 and 
2016 vehicle. She and her husband rent their residence. She is making payments for a 
2015 computer she purchased. She has an $800 loan that she obtained in 2010. Her 
payments of $117 are current. She has renewed the loan to obtain additional money. 
She also pays $149 monthly on a loan she obtained in 2007. The balance is about $600 
and is current.20 
 
 Applicant has about $500 remaining after she pays her monthly expenses. She 
has about $600 in savings and $750 in checking accounts. She contributes to her 
employer’s pension plan and has about $8,000-$9,000 saved. In 2012, she withdrew 
money from the plan to pay for college expenses for one of her stepchildren. She 
incurred tax consequences and stated that the 2012 tax issues relate to that withdrawal. 
She estimated she paid about $70,000 for her stepchildren’s legal fees. Applicant stated 
that she let her finances get away from her and she is working toward putting them in 
order.21  
 
 A witness who served with Applicant in the Air Force in 1994 testified on her 
behalf. She stated Applicant was a hard worker, honest, and disciplined. She stated that 
Applicant is not a liability to the country. She noted that Applicant’s husband is not 
financially responsibly.22  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. In them she is described as loyal, reliable, 
honorable, compassionate, diligent, dedicated, humble, professional, hardworking, 
conscientious, responsible and trustworthy. She goes above and beyond in her efforts 
to serve the clients of her employer and is a person of integrity.23 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
19 Tr. 14, 30-48, 117. Applicant’s tax debts were not alleged and are not considered for disqualifying 
purposes, but may be considered when analyzing her credibility, in mitigation, and the whole-person 
analysis. 
 
20 Tr. 84-93. 
 
21 Tr. 94-97, 122. 
 
22 Tr. 119-121. 
 
23 AE I. 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.24 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts that began accumulating several 
years ago and continue to the present. She has more than $120,000 of delinquent 
student loans. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
                                                          
24 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to her husband’s unemployment and 
legal fees associated with her stepchildren beginning in 2009. After receiving the SOR 
she began to address her delinquent student loans and started a rehabilitation program 
in February 2017. The SOR debts she documented as paid were not resolved until after 
she received the SOR, and many not until prior to her hearing or soon after her hearing. 
Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous and, under the circumstances, I cannot find that 
her behavior is unlikely to recur because of her inconsistent payment history and her 
failure to conscientiously address her debts. Her behavior casts doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s husband’s unemployment was beyond her control, as were the legal 
fees associated with her stepchildren. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had numerous small 
delinquent medical debts that she did not pay until before her hearing, some after her 
hearing, and some are still being resolved. She began obtaining student loans in 1991 
and believed they were deferred while she served in the military. She made payments 
on the loans periodically over the years. She secured more student loans beginning in 
2004. Again stating that she made payments after completing her education, she did not 
provide corroborating documentation showing past payments. In 2009, Applicant’s 
family situation affected her finances, but she provided insufficient evidence showing 
that she was responsibly addressing or making payments on the loans until her security 
clearance was at issue. After receiving the SOR, she started a rehabilitation program 
 
9 
 
 
and began payments in February 2017. She has not yet completed the rehabilitation 
program. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is some evidence Applicant received financial counseling through a phone 
conference with the law firm she hired. She recently entered into a loan rehabilitation 
program for her student loans, but she has not yet completed it. It is unknown what her 
future monthly payments will be. She paid some of her delinquent debts, but has others 
that are unresolved. She also testified that she has tax debts that were brought to her 
attention by the IRS. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that there are clear 
indications her finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies.  
 
 In February 2017, Applicant began making payments to rehabilitate her student 
loans. Applicant failed to provide a sufficient payment history to show she had been 
addressing her student loans before they became a security concern. Insufficient time 
has elapsed to conclude she is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay her student 
loans. Before her hearing and shortly after, she paid some delinquent debts. Although, 
some delinquent debts have been paid, I cannot find that resolution of those debts 
constitute a good-faith initiative, based on her failure to begin paying them until months 
after receiving the SOR and with some after the conclusion of her hearing. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts, except ¶ 1.c. She admitted she had an 
account with the creditor, but disputed she owes the debt. The law firm is disputing the 
account for her and she is waiting for its results. There is insufficient documentary 
evidence to determine the basis of the dispute or actions to resolve it. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply to this debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old. She served in the military for four years and received 
an honorable discharge. She has a history of financial problems. Her husband was 
unemployed for several years and two of her stepchildren had problems, and she paid 
their legal fees. The balance of Applicant’s consolidated student loans is more than 
$121,000. She failed to provide evidence that she has been consistently making 
payments on the loans over the years. After receiving the SOR, she began a 
rehabilitation program for the loans. She had numerous small delinquent debts that she 
did not pay until before her hearing and some after her hearing. These debts are now 
resolved, but her failure to pay them until her security clearance became a concern 
raises serious questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Similarly, her failure to responsibly address her student loans over the years and her 
inconsistent payment history raise the same concerns. Although not considered for 
disqualifying purposes, Applicant also has both federal and state income tax issues that 
are unresolved and will affect her future finances. She has not established a reliable 
track record of financial stability or management. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude she failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.w:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.x-1.ff:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
