 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01750  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 5, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 1, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on December 
12, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on December 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 19, 2017. The 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 
5, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf, and  
presented ten documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through J. 
The record was left open until February 10, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit marked and admitted as 
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) 
on January 30, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the sole allegation in SOR.  After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 57 years old and married with two adult children.  He has a high 
school GED and one year of college.  He holds the position of Avionics Technician with 
a defense contractor. He has been employed with his current employer since April 
2014. He has worked in the defense industry for almost 35 years and held a security 
clearance since 2000.  He has never had a security clearance violation. 
  
   Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service a total of $32,000 in Federal taxes 
for tax year 2011, 2012 and 2013.  He also owed about $6,500 to the State taxing 
authority.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  These back taxes are a result of not having enough 
withholdings for those tax years.  In his personal subject interview, Applicant explained 
that between 2011 and 2013 he had a large profit from a real estate sale, through his 
real estate business, and sufficient taxes were not taken out.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  
Applicant was employed with a defense contractor for 32 years before he was laid off in 
2013.  This sudden reduction of his income forced him to exhaust his savings to live on. 
From 2013 to 2014, Applicant was unemployed following the lay-off at work until he was 
hired by his current employer in 2014.  During his unemployment, he exhausted his 
savings and without income had to obtain a loan modification on his home, which 
negatively impacted his credit scores.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  Applicant could not keep 
up the IRS payments on his back taxes and stay current on his other debts.  He made 
attempts to reach the IRS to set up another payment arrangement but was unsuccessful 
until recently because the IRS wanted a substantial up-front cash payment.       
 
 Applicant testified that he paid the IRS the back the taxes owed for tax years 
2011 and 2012.  He made the payment of $250 a month until the IRS suspended the 
agreement in 2013, about the same time he was laid off of his job.  As the years 
passed, Applicant continued to owe more taxes.      
 
 Applicant currently owes a balance of $30,370 for Federal back taxes for 2013 
and 2015.  After receiving the SOR in 2016, he set up a payment arrangement with the 
IRS.  He initially proposed a monthly payment of $250 but they were not willing to 
accept it.  They counter-offered, and agreed to accept $388 monthly.  Applicant testified 
that he is willing and able to pay the $388 monthly but has not started the payment plan 
yet.  A copy of a letter from the IRS indicates that the payment plan will start in February 
 
3 
 
2017.  Applicant submitted Post-Hearing Exhibit A, his most recent letter from the IRS 
that indicates the payment plan will start in March 2017.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of delinquent back taxes that began in 2011 and has 
continued to the present.  It is noted that he was laid off from work for a year from 2013 
to 2014, but he had incurred delinquent back taxes before that happened.  He has 
continued to have tax problems, and currently owes excessive Federal and state taxes.  
The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authorities to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant partially attributed his tax delinquencies to his loss of employment for a 
year from 2013 to 2014.  These are circumstances beyond his control. However, he 
failed to establish that he acted reasonably or responsibly once he was employed in 
2014 by his current employer.  In fact, he did not start paying back taxes again until he 
received the SOR in this case.  He has not demonstrated that he addressed his debts in 
a responsible or timely manner. Full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) and 20(g) has not 
been established. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing.  To his benefit, he and the IRS have 
recently agreed to a payment plan that he intends to follow.  However, based upon the 
fact that he has not yet started the payment plan, and his tax problems have seemed 
over time to resolve and resurface, he has not demonstrated that future tax problems 
are unlikely. Applicant’s taxes for 2013 and 2015 remain owing. There are no clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not provide mitigation. 
 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a long history of working in the defense industry.  He has been 
working for his current employer since April 2014.  Using the level of judgment required 
to access classified information would have required Applicant to ensure that his 
payment plan was well in effect, showing a systematic method of payments to resolve 
his current tax debt, without reoccurrence, as well as a guarantee to the administrative 
judge that his tax exemptions going forward have been properly calculated to avoid 
future tax problems.  He has failed in both regards.    
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
