 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00882 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq. 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated 
concerns related to his marijuana use and purchases between 1976 and 2015. 
Sufficient passage of time and change in Applicant’s circumstances make future use 
unlikely to recur. He also submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation for any future use of marijuana. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to deny his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On March 13, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses and the parties 
complied.2  At the hearing, convened on April 26, 2017, I admitted Government’s Exhibit 
(GE) 1 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. Applicant offered a 
third exhibit, which I excluded for the reasons discussed below. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on April 26, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Ruling on Motion in Limine 
 
 Department Counsel filed a motion in limine to exclude an exhibit Applicant 
offered for judicial notice identified as a “marijuana package,” containing a Department 
of Justice (DOJ) memorandum, a Gallup poll, and two newspaper articles regarding 
attitudes about marijuana use. In response, Department Counsel offered a series of 
guidance memoranda from Director of National Intelligence (DNI), DOD, and DOJ 
regarding the respective agencies positions on the applicability and enforcement of 
federal drug laws regarding marijuana. Sustaining, in part, Department Counsel’s 
objection, I excluded the Gallup poll and newspaper articles, and admitted the DNI, 
DOD, and DOJ guidance memoranda.3  
 
 
Application of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, DNI issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable 
to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to 
classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The 2017 AG superseded 
the AG implemented in September 2006, and they are effective for any adjudication 
made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied them in this case. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 56, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
September 2015. He previously worked for a federal contractor from October 2014 to 
June 2015, but did not require access to classified information. He completed a security 
clearance application, his first, in October 2015, disclosing marijuana use between 1977 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 The Motion in Limine is appended to the record as HE III, and the guidance memoranda are appended 
as HE IV – VIII. The excluded documents are included in the record as an appellate exhibit. 
 
 
3 
 
and August 2015. He also admitted purchasing the drug on three occasions between 
1977 and 2015. These disclosures are the basis of the SOR allegations.4 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in high school. He used the drug in social settings 
approximately once per week. He continued using the drug during college, sometimes 
with friends more than once per week. Applicant left college after two years and began 
working in the hotel industry. Although he continued to use marijuana after college, his 
use tapered off to approximately once per year. By the time Applicant met his wife in 
1986, he was not using the drug at all. Between 1986 and 2015, Applicant used 
marijuana infrequently, what he describes as a “handful of times.” His most recent use 
occurred in August 2015, when he purchased one marijuana joint from a friend, which 
he used over the course of one week. He smoked at home when his family was not in 
the house. At the time, Applicant was unemployed. He did not use the drug during his 
prior eight-month employment with a federal contracting company.5 
 
 Applicant regrets his recent drug use and admits that he did not exercise good 
judgment. He revealed his recent marijuana use to his wife, who is not a marijuana 
user, when he completed his security clearance application. Applicant remains in 
contact with the friend with whom he used and purchased marijuana. Applicant has told 
his friend about the adverse impact of marijuana use on his national security eligibility 
and informed his friend that he will not use marijuana in the future. To that end, 
Applicant has also signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation for future 
violations.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 GE 1.  
 
5 Tr. 23-37; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 39-42, 45-48; AE A.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 “The illegal use of controlled substances…can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to 
physical or psychological impartment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”7 Applicant admits 
using marijuana, with varying frequency between 1976 and his last use of the drug in 
August 2015.8 He also admits buying the drug on three occasions in the 38 years 
between 1977 and 2015.9 
 
 However, the record contains enough evidence to mitigate the concerns raised 
by Applicant’s history of marijuana use. Applicant’s use is mitigated by the passage of 
time and no longer reflects on his current security worthiness. While there is no bright-
line rule dictating the period of abstinence required for a finding that the conduct is not 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 24. 
 
8 AG ¶ 25(a). 
 
9 AG ¶ 25(c). 
 
 
5 
 
recent, Applicant last marijuana use occurred two years ago. Relying on other factors in 
addition to the simple passage of time,10 the record supports a finding that Applicant’s 
drug use is unlikely to recur.11 Applicant was unemployed. His use was limited to social 
settings or alone in his home. Over the course of 38 years, the infrequent nature of his 
use does not indicate a pattern of abuse or addiction. He has demonstrated the intent 
not to use drugs in the future, signing a statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
his security clearance for any future violation.12  
 
 Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s current security 
worthiness. Applicant acknowledges his poor judgment in deciding to use illegal drugs. 
It is not the purpose of a security clearance case to punish or sanction a person for their 
past actions. Rather, it is a predictive risk assessment based on the past conduct. He is 
aware of the prohibition against such use as a clearance holder. By voluntarily 
disclosing his past and recent marijuana use, Applicant has shown that he is likely to 
continue to self-report adverse information once granted access to classified 
information. Furthermore, his disclosures to his wife and to the Government eliminates 
the conduct as a potential source of vulnerability or exploitation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 See Id. 
 
11 AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 26(b). 
