 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-01135 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 19, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has paid or resolved all of his once past-due debts. Based on a review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on September 16, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On June 27, 2016, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on July 26, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on August 23, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 31, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on September 13, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 25, 2016. The Government 
offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through Q, which were admitted without objection, 
and testified on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open 
until November 10, 2016, to permit him to submit additional evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 1, 2016. Applicant submitted Applicant 
Exhibits R, S, and T in a timely manner. Department Counsel had no objection and the 
exhibits were admitted into evidence. The the record closed as scheduled.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old and employed by a defense contractor as an Instructional 
Systems Developer. He has a bachelor’s degree. (Applicant Exhibit F.) Applicant 
separated from his wife in 2012, and has two minor children. He is seeking to retain a 
security clearance previously granted in connection with his employment. He has held a 
security clearance at various times during both his military and civilian careers.   
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR with 
explanations. He also submitted additional evidence to support his request for a finding 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant stated that his financial problems, as set out below, were due to several 
extenuating circumstances. Applicant served in the Marine Corps from 1996 to 2005. 
After being honorably discharged from the Marine Corps, he was employed by a civilian 
contractor and traveled for work until he was laid off in 2014. During most of that period 
he let his wife handle the finances. Unfortunately, she did not do a good job and it was 
not until about 2012 that he found out about their financial problems. In addition, off and 
on from 2008 through 2010, a family friend lived with Applicant and his wife. This friend 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
took advantage of Applicant’s wife financially, and left Applicant with several bad debts. 
Applicant’s wife confirmed this in writing. Once Applicant took control of his finances, he 
changed his lifestyle significantly, so as to be able to pay his now delinquent debts and 
maintain his current debts. This continued through his eight months of unemployment 
from September 2014 through May 2015, when he obtained his current job. (Applicant 
Exhibits A and E; Tr. 37-40, 65-66, 71-75, 78-81.) 
 
 The SOR alleged, and Applicant admitted, that he owed approximately $28,338 in 
past-due indebtedness to various creditors. Support for the existence and amount of the 
debts is supported by admissions of the Applicant, and credit reports submitted by the 
Government dated November 16, 2005; October 7, 2015; August 23, 2016. (Government 
Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.) Applicant also submitted credit reports, dated October 24, 2016, 
from the three credit-reporting agencies. (Applicant Exhibits O, P, and Q.)  
 
 The current status of the debts is as follows:  
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he owed a creditor $219 for a past-due medical debt 
regarding one of his minor children. This debt was paid in full on July 19, 2016, as 
confirmed by a receipt from the creditor. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit H; Tr. 
26-28.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that he owed a creditor $120 for a past-due medical debt 
regarding one of his minor children. This debt was paid in full on July 19, 2016, as 
confirmed by a receipt from the creditor. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit I; Tr. 
27.) 
  
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he owed a finance company $14,835. However, 
Applicant also stated that he could not confirm what the debt was for when he talked to 
the finance company in July 2016. Applicant testified that at that time he provided the 
finance company with, “my Social Security number, my current address, the address that 
I had [in another city], and my name and wife’s name and Social Security number, and 
there was nothing that came up with any of that information.” This debt only appears on 
Government Exhibit 4, and not on any of the other credit reports of the Government or 
Applicant. I find that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve this debt. (Tr. 28-
32, 69-71.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a collection agent $10,265 for a past-due credit card 
debt. However, Applicant further stated that he could not remember owning this particular 
credit card. Applicant’s wife did have a card with that bank. Applicant called the creditor, 
who could not provide Applicant with validation of the debt or the amount. As a result of 
not being able to legally validate the debt, the collection agent sent Applicant a letter 
stating, “In the spirit of good customer service, we are closing the above referenced 
account. All collection efforts have ceased and will not resume.” The letter also confirmed 
that the balance owed was $0. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit R; Tr. 32-35.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing his home city $29 for a parking ticket. He paid this 
debt on July 14, 2016, as confirmed by a statement from the city treasurer. This debt is 
resolved. (Applicant Exhibit J; Tr. 36-37.)  
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing his home city $31 for a second parking ticket. He 
paid this debt on July 14, 2016, as confirmed by a statement from the city treasurer. This 
debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit J; Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $778 for a past-due credit card debt. 
Applicant made a payment arrangement with this creditor whereby he would pay $97.27 
a month for eight months to resolve the debt. Applicant submitted documentation from 
the creditor and his bank to confirm that he has been making consistent monthly 
payments under the agreement since July 2016. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant 
Exhibits K, S, and T; Tr. 40-43.) 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted that he owed a creditor $311 for a past-due medical debt 
regarding one of his minor children. This debt was paid in full on September 16, 2016, as 
confirmed by a receipt from the creditor. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit L; Tr. 
44-45.) 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing $97 for a past-due utility bill. Applicant paid this debt 
in full on July 14, 2016, as confirmed by a receipt from the utility company. This debt is 
resolved. (Applicant Exhibit M; Tr. 45.) 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing $445 for a past-due credit card debt. Applicant paid 
the debt in full for less than the full balance on July 24, 2016, as confirmed by a receipt 
from the bank. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit N; Tr. 46.) 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $848. 
This was a credit card of Applicant’s wife. He was unable to find out any information about 
this creditor despite repeated attempts. Applicant spoke to the parent company of the 
bank that issued the credit card, but the parent company was unable to provide Applicant 
any information. Once again, he provided them with his name, his wife’s name, Social 
Security numbers, and addresses without success. This debt only appears on 
Government Exhibit 4, and not on any of the other credit reports of the Government or 
Applicant. I find that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve this debt. (Tr. 46-
49.) 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. His period of unemployment 
showed Applicant how he could make do with less, and he has continued to do that. He 
provides support for his wife and two children, which does not prove a strain on his 
finances. (Applicant Exhibits O, P, and Q; Tr. 57-68, 79-84.)  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant provided three letters of recommendation from people who knew him in 
the Marine Corps, the defense industry, or both. He is described as being “extremely 
professional and trustworthy” by one writer. (Applicant Exhibit B.) Another writer states 
Applicant is a person of “integrity.” (Applicant Exhibit C.)  
 
 Applicant’s Exhibit D is from Applicant’s current supervisor. The writer states, “I 
trust [Applicant] and do not have a reason to doubt his integrity.” The supervisor also 
provided a copy of an impact award that was given to Applicant in May 2016 because of 
his hard work on a particular contract. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
 
 
6 
 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had approximately $28,000 in past-due debts that he had not paid as of 
the time the SOR was issued. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has paid or otherwise resolved all of the debts in the SOR. Most of the 
past-due indebtedness was incurred, or became delinquent, about the time of his 
separation from his wife and period of unemployment. Once he was made aware of the 
debts, and of the Government’s concerns, Applicant moved quickly to pay the debts he 
could either in full, or through negotiated payments.  
 
 Applicant provided documented proof that the debt in subparagraph 1.d was 
resolved in his favor because the creditor could not legally validate the debt. Despite his 
best efforts, he was unable to find any confirmation of the debts in subparagraphs 1.c, 
and 1.k. His current financial status is stable, and he evinces a credible intent of being 
able to maintain that stability into the future. He has fully mitigated all the allegations in 
the SOR. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
 
8 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for national security 
eligibility, and a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
