 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-02099 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate alleged security concerns 
raised by his relatives and financial interests in the United Kingdom (U.K.). He also 
mitigated alleged foreign preference concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the foreign influence and foreign preference guidelines.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a determination on the written record (Answer). 
 
 On October 24, 2016, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s written 
case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. With the 
FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant four exhibits (Items 1 – 4) that the 
Government offers for admission into the record. Applicant submitted a response to the 
                                                          
1 Pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The CAF applied the previous 
version of adjudicative guidelines, which were in force from September 1, 2006 to June 7, 2017.  
 
2 
 
FORM (Response), and submitted three documents for admission into the record 
(Exhibits A – C). The offered exhibits are admitted into the record without objection.2 
 
 On July 1, 2017, I was assigned Applicant’s case. The record closed on July 7, 
2017, when I received confirmation that Applicant remained sponsored for a clearance.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 47, was born in the U.K. He and his wife, who have been married for 
20 years, immigrated to the United States in 2000. They became U.S. citizens in 2014, 
and their two children were born in the United States.  
 
 Applicant holds two master’s degrees, one from a school in the U.K. and another 
from a U.S. school. He is the managing partner of his own U.S. firm. He is seeking a 
security clearance to work on a multi-national contract (no U.K. involvement). 
 
 Applicant has a number of relatives (parents, sibling, in-laws, and an aunt) who 
are citizens and residents of the U.K. He also owns real estate in the U.K., which is 
currently worth an estimated $200,000. The property is Applicant’s and his wife’s former 
home in the U.K., which they purchased for about $50,000. They currently rent the 
property. Applicant has other financial interests in the U.K. totaling about $500,000, 
primarily consisting of professionally managed retirement accounts. These retirement 
accounts consist of mutual fund investments in U.S. and U.K. stocks. Applicant cannot 
access the funds held in these accounts until he reaches retirement age.  
 
 Applicant and his wife own their home in the United States. They also own 
another U.S. property. Their U.S. real estate holdings are worth approximately $2 
million. Applicant’s U.S. bank accounts and investment accounts total another $2 
million. He formed a U.S. domestic corporation in 2012 in the state in which he resides. 
This is the business he currently owns and operates.  
 
 Applicant fully reported the information about his foreign relatives, financial 
interests, and travel on his security clearance application. He also reported his dual 
citizenship and that he held a foreign passport, which he received before becoming a 
U.S. citizen. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has only traveled internationally 
using his U.S. passport. He discussed these matters fully during a security clearance 
interview. He subsequently returned his U.K. passport to U.K. authorities.  
 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant did not raise an objection to any of the exhibits offered by the Government. However, he did 
note in his Response that the summary of his security clearance interview (Item 4) contained inaccurate 
information. The inaccurate information is irrelevant to the security concerns at issue and, thus, any 
potential concerns as to the reliability of the exhibit are rendered moot. Nevertheless, I have considered 
Applicant’s Response in assessing the amount of weight to give the interview summary. ISCR Case No 
03-21434 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007) (“the DOHA process encourages Judges to err on the side of 
initially admitting evidence into the record, and then to consider . . . what, if any, weight to give to that 
evidence.”). See also ISCR Case No. 14-06011 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (“The weight that a Judge 
assigns to evidence is a matter within his or her discretion.”). 
 
3 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), revising the adjudicative guidelines. These 
revised adjudicative guidelines are applicable to all security clearance decisions issued 
on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the revised adjudicative guidelines 
(“AG”). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance 
decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative 
judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a 
reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same 
record.” Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national 
security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held 
that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 3  
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives and financial interests in a foreign country. Instead, in 
assessing an individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative 
judge considers the foreign government involved; its relationship with the United States; 
its intelligence-gathering history; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent 
factors. See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 
2007) (factors an administrative judge should consider in foreign influence cases). 
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all the Guideline B 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;4 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 6. 
 
4 Department Counsel concedes that Applicant’s contact with his relatives in the U.K. do not raise a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation. Counsel, however, then goes on to argue that such a risk 
potentially exists due to a purported 2002 incident involving the public disclosure of U.S. classified 
information by the British parliament. No evidence or matter for administrative notice was offered 
regarding this alleged incident. See FORM at 2-3. I have not considered this portion of counsel’s 
argument, as he is arguing (purported) facts not in evidence. 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 7(f):  substantial business, financial, or property interests in a 
foreign country . . . that could subject the individual to a heightened risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation or personal conflict of interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual . . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(f):  the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, 
or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 In the instant case, the foreign country at issue is the U.K., which is generally 
regarded as the United States’ closest ally and both countries share a special 
relationship. They are the leading democracies and a model for other nations to emulate 
when it comes to the rule of law and the protection of individual rights and liberties. 
Nonetheless, foreign influence security concerns are not wholly resolved simply 
because the country at issue is a friendly one, for even friendly nations can disagree on 
matters that they consider vital to their national interest and not all cases of espionage 
against the United States have involved hostile nations.5 
 
 Applicant’s familial and financial connections to the U.K. are not insignificant. 
However, when compared and contrasted to the personal and professional bonds that 
Applicant has established in the United States, these foreign connections are not 
enough to raise a true security concern. Of note, Applicant and his wife permanently 
immigrated to the United States nearly 20 years ago. They started a family in the United 
States and their children, who were born and raised in the United States are now 
teenagers. Applicant started a successful business in the United States and the majority 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
6 
 
of his wealth is held in the United States. In light of the preceding and considering the 
country at issue, Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest 
involving his foreign connections in favor of the United States. 
 
Furthermore, Applicant fully reported his foreign relatives, financial interests, and 
travel on his security clearance application. He then voluntarily agreed to a security 
clearance interview, where he discussed these matters fully. No evidence was 
submitted that he or any of his family members have any connection to any foreign 
government or are indebted to any foreign government or entity.  
 
After reviewing the entire record and weighing the evidence, both favorable and 
unfavorable, I find that all the above listed mitigating conditions apply. Applicant met his 
heavy burden of proof and mitigated the alleged security concerns arising from his 
relationship to his relatives and financial interests in the U.K. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 A security concern arises when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States. Such action may indicate that 
the person may provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the Untied 
States. However, foreign citizenship by itself does not raise a security concern under 
Guideline C, unless the foreign citizenship is in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests or the person attempted to conceal the information about his foreign 
citizenship. See generally AG ¶ 9. 
 
Applicant’s dual citizenship and past possession of a U.K. passport do not raise a 
foreign preference security concern. No evidence was presented that he has exercised 
any right or privilege of foreign citizenship, or accepted any foreign benefit. Moreover, 
he self-reported his dual citizenship, foreign passport, and other foreign connections. He 
surrendered the U.K. passport to U.K. authorities.  
 
Accordingly, the Guideline C allegation is also decided in Applicant’s favor. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
present eligibility for a security clearance.6  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
                                                          
6 In reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept. See AG ¶ 2. 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
