 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No.: 16-00723 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 14, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant is indebted to six creditors in the amount of $38,042. He has not 
resolved any of his delinquencies to the satisfaction of his creditors. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 20, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016. (Answer.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On August 9, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on August 18, 2016, and received by him on August 23, 2016. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in a submission dated September 18, 2016. 
He did not object to Items 1 through 7. Applicant also submitted additional information in 
his FORM response, to which Department Counsel had no objection. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on May 10, 2017. Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence. 
Applicant’s response to the FORM is marked as exhibit (AE) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is married. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1986. 
He has worked for his employer since July 2012. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to six creditors in the amount of $38,042. Applicant’s debts 
appear in credit reports dated January 2015 and June 2016. Applicant attributed his 
delinquencies to falling behind on his bills after the death of his mother in 2010. (Item 4; 
Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a judgment filed against him in March 
2012 in the amount of $7,528 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant claimed in his Answer and in AE A 
that this debt is the same debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e, although the accounts bear different 
creditor’s names and account numbers. He presented a copy of the judgment file 
against him by the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a with his answer. He claimed to be 
paying on this debt and presented a copy of a money order made out to the creditor 
identified in SOR ¶ 1.a in the amount of $24.36, and a letter to an attorney claiming to 
be making the final installment on this debt. The case number on that money order does 
 
 
3 
 
 
not match the case number on the judgment. Item 5 shows that there were two different 
judgments against Applicant by this creditor. One judgment was satisfied in December 
2015. That satisfied judgment bears the same account number as printed on Applicant’s 
money order. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence that he has resolved or is 
resolving this debt. (Answer; AE A; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the 
amount of $4,691 (SOR ¶ 1.b). This debt has been delinquent since January 2011. 
Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer, and claimed to be “in active state of 
remittance,” having reduced the balance to $2,929. (Answer) In AE A, he claimed to 
have fully resolved this account and to have enclosed a copy of the final payment. 
However, his submission does not contain clear evidence that this debt is resolved. 
(Answer; AE A; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the 
amount of $4,235 (SOR ¶ 1.c). This debt became a “major delinquency” in May 2014. 
He last made a payment in April 2016, as reflected on his June 2016 credit report. 
Further, an account statement provided by Applicant shows this debt has a balance of 
$4,095. This debt is unresolved. (AE A; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the 
amount of $9,060 (SOR ¶ 1.d). This debt became a “major delinquency” in April 2014. 
He last made a payment in April 2016, as reflected on his June 2016 credit report. This 
debt is unresolved. (AE A; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the 
amount of $5,169 (SOR ¶ 1.e). This account was charged off by the creditor. Applicant’s 
last payment on this debt was in February 2014. (Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the 
amount of $7,359 (SOR ¶ 1.f). This debt became a “major delinquency” in June 2011. 
He last made a payment in November 2010, as reflected on his June 2016 credit report. 
(Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant is indebted to six creditors in the amount of $38,042. He has taken little 
action to document resolution of these delinquencies, despite his claims of making 
payment on some of them. The facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
financial problems have been ongoing since 2011. Further, as his debts are unresolved, 
his financial problem continue to date. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). The 2010 death of 
Applicant’s mother was a circumstance beyond his control. However, he did not provide 
evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to his debt, 
which is necessary for full mitigation under this condition. He has been fully employed 
since 2012, yet he has documented few steps taken to resolve his delinquencies. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable. 
 
At this time, he has not established a history of responsible action with respect to 
his credit card debt or judgment. There is no discernable evidence of a good-faith effort 
to repay those debts in the record. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial 
difficulties. He failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or 
permanent behavioral change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial 
 
 
7 
 
 
irresponsibility. His ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to his 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
