 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03438 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 30, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 7, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through E. There were no objections to any exhibits offered and all were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on June 15, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m. He 
admitted the remaining SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He attended technical school in 1992. He was married 
from 1991 to 2000 and from 2003 to 2012. He has children ages 24, 21, 19, and 13 
years old. He has joint custody of his youngest child.2  
 
Applicant has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
January 2015. He was unemployed from October 2014 to January 2015. He indicated 
on his security clearance application (SCA) that he quit his job in October 2014 where 
he had worked since June 2014, after being told he would be fired. He was unemployed 
from February 2014 to June 2014; May 2013 to September 2013; and January 2006 to 
January 2007.3 
 
In Applicant’s February 2015 security clearance application (SCA), he disclosed 
he had a delinquent medical debt for $5,000 that he was unable to pay because of 
unemployment. He disclosed “payment plans being established.”4 Applicant testified 
that he never established a payment plan because he learned the claim was not filed 
correctly.5 
 
As part of a background investigation, Applicant was interviewed by a 
government investigator in August 2016. He attributed his financial difficulties to his 
divorce, lack of health insurance, and periods of unemployment. During his interview, he 
explained that now that he was employed, he was capable of meeting his current and 
future financial obligations. He planned to pay all of his outstanding debts. He 
acknowledged during the interview that he was responsible for the medical debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g, and 1.i through 1.l. In his January 2017 answer to 
the SOR regarding the allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l, he stated: 
                                                          
2 Tr. 19-22. 
 
3 Tr. 23; GE 1.  
 
4 GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 58-59; GE 1.  
 
3 
 
 
“I am in the process of determining the validity of charges, insurance payment 
information and allegation of charges and will have the information at the time of the In-
person hearing with the Administrative Judge.” Many of the medical debts alleged in the 
SOR have been in a delinquent status since at least 2013 and some longer. All debts on 
the SOR are confirmed by credit reports from March 2015 and September 2016.  
 
Applicant testified since his divorce in 2012, he has moved four times and 
changed insurance companies. When he was unemployed, he was unable to pay for 
health insurance and did not pay his medical bills. He explained that when he changed 
insurance companies the medical claims were not transferred. He would get the bill and 
it would not be from the correct insurance company, and he would call and get it 
transferred to the correct one. He stated that he knew he had delinquent medical bills, 
but was unaware of the extent. He explained that once a debt goes to collection, it is 
difficult to find the specific creditor, and it is a time consuming process.6 
 
On May 24, 2017, Applicant entered into an agreement with a credit counseling 
service to address some of his delinquent debts. The debts included in the contract are 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($2,430), 1.b ($215), 1.e ($459), 1.g ($714), and another delinquent debt 
that is not alleged in the SOR ($624). He made his first payment of $101 in June 2017. 
He testified the plan was not implemented until May 2017 because it took time to go 
through his credit report and insurance company to verify debts.7  
 
Applicant testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($2,430) is for a lease that was 
signed by his son. He was put on notice about the debt during his background interview 
and agreed he owed the debt, but stated it was for an outstanding medical bill. The 
creditor advised Applicant that he had cosigned the lease. It is listed as a joint debt on 
his credit reports. He denies he cosigned it, but he agreed to pay the debt. His son has 
agreed to give Applicant $100 a month to pay the debt, and his son has made one 
payment. This debt has been delinquent since 2012.8 
 
Applicant stated that in March 2017, he contacted the creditors for the debts 
alleged in the SOR to determine the validity of the debts and to determine the amounts 
he owed. If the creditor failed to respond, he stated he added them to a list that he will 
pay, if they ever respond. He disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 1.i, and they 
were removed from his credit reports. He paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($141) and 
provided a supporting document. The credit reports he provided confirm his statements 
and the debts above are resolved. He also stated that some of the medical debts could 
belong to his ex-wife, but he was not certain.9  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 25, 32-40. 
 
7 Tr. 29-32, 35-37, 42-43. 
 
8 Tr. 25-30; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. 36-41, 44-48; AE B, C, D, E, F.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant acknowledged he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($154), and it is not 
resolved. Applicant testified that the debts in in SOR ¶ 1.j ($8,259), 1.k ($18,433), and 
1.l ($1,641) are legitimate debts. He is waiting to see what his insurance will play, but 
also indicated that he believed he would owe at least $2,000 for copayments on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.k. He disputed the utility bill in SOR ¶ 1.m ($78) and intended to 
resolve it in the next week.10  
 
 Applicant did not have supporting insurance documents regarding his medical 
claims. Applicant stated that he intended to resolve the delinquent debts he owed, and 
his bills are current. He owns two vehicles and his loans are current ($687 and $280). 
He received financial counseling through a phone interview from the credit counseling 
service in approximately May 2017, which helped him make a budget. The only person 
he provides support for is his 13-year-old child.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
                                                          
10 Tr. 46-50. 
 
11 Tr. 51-61; AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts that began accumulating in 
approximately 2012 that he was unable or unwilling to resolve. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment, lack of 
health insurance, and a divorce. He has been gainfully employed since January 2015. 
He was put on notice when he completed his SCA in February 2015 that financial 
issues could be a security concern. In August 2016, he was interviewed by a 
 
7 
 
 
government investigator and acknowledged he had numerous delinquent debts. In his 
January 2017 answer to the SOR, he indicated he was actively pursuing resolution of 
the debts. Applicant disputed some debts, and they have been removed from his credit 
report. Shortly before his hearing, he entered into an agreement with a credit counseling 
service and four of the SOR debts on a payment plan. He made one payment. The 
remaining debts are not yet resolved. Although employed since January 2015, Applicant 
did not provide evidence of action he took to resolve any of his delinquent debts before 
he received the SOR. Most of the debts are over four years old and many remain 
unresolved. I find the evidence is insufficient to conclude that his behavior is unlikely to 
recur. His behavior casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s unemployment, lack of health insurance, and 2012 divorce were 
beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His actions to address his delinquent debts did 
not occur until after he received the SOR. The payment plan to resolve four of the SOR 
debts did not occur until late May 2017. He has made only one payment into the 
payment plan. Others debts that he agrees are legitimate have not been resolved. 
Although he stated he is waiting for the insurance company to provide information so he 
can resolve the other debts, these debts became delinquent in approximately 2013. 
There is insufficient evidence to show that he has acted responsibly in addressing his 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is some evidence Applicant received financial counseling and that he is 
resolving some of his delinquent debts. I understand his contact with creditors was done 
via telephone, and I believe he has contacted some creditors in an attempt to resolve 
his medical debts. However, most of the debts have been delinquent for almost four 
years. Despite being aware of the security implications, he has delayed in addressing 
them, and the largest debts are not resolved. Applicant has made only one payment of 
$101 toward repayment of his delinquent debts, which did not occur until June 2017. At 
this juncture, I am unable to conclude that his financial problems are under control. AG 
¶ 20(c) has some applicability.  
 
 It is too early to conclude that Applicant is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, and 1.g because he has only made one 
payment on the plan with the credit counseling service. He has not provided evidence of 
any other payments made towards his remaining debts, even a small debt for utilities. 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debt he resolved in SOR ¶ 1.h. It does not apply to any other 
debts. 
 
 Applicant disputed some debts on his credit report and they were removed. He 
provided documentary evidence regarding those debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 1.i because they are no longer on his credit report. He does not 
dispute the legitimacy of the debts in SOR ¶¶1.d, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l, but is waiting for his 
insurance company to provide him information about his potential share of the amount 
owed. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to these debts. 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He had periods of unemployment, lack of health 
insurance, and a divorce that negatively affected his finances. However, he has been 
steadily employed since January 2015. He was aware of medical debts that he failed to 
pay while unemployed and failed to take any meaningful action to resolve the delinquent 
debts until after he received the SOR. Many of these debts are more than four years 
old. Although, he has a payment plan to address four debts, he has only made one 
payment, and the largest debts remain unresolved. The evidence is insufficient to 
conclude that once employed, Applicant began responsibly addressing his 
delinquencies. He does not have a reliable financial track record. His conduct raises 
questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
