1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-02047 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government :Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings, Applicant failed to mitigate drug involvement 
and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 7, 2015, to retain a security clearance required for a position with a 
defense contractor. (Item 2) After an interview conducted by a security investigator from 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 14, 2015 (PSI), the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. (Item 4) On August 15, 2016, DOD issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for drug involvement (Guideline H) and 
personal conduct (Guideline E). (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
     07/17/2017
2 
 
2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions 
issued after that date.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2016. She admitted all of the 
allegations under both guidelines. Applicant elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on April 1, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
October 11, 2016, and she was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not 
provide additional information in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on June 1, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 4) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. She was further advised 
that she could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and she could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no 
objection was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she 
waived any objection to the admissibility of the summary. Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM. Since Applicant did not respond to the FORM, she did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. I will consider information in the PSI in my 
decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 52-year-old 1983 high school graduate who has been employed as a 
welder for a DOD contractor since May 2002. She married in April 1987 and divorced in 
April 1988. She married again in November 1991 and divorced in July 1997. She has no 
children. She has not served in the military. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated May 7, 2015; Item 4, 
PSI, dated September 14, 2015) 
 
The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, drug involvement security concerns for 
using cocaine from April 1993 until June 2012 (SOR 1.a), and while possessing a 
security clearance granted in September 2005 (SOR 1.b) Applicant completed and 
certified as correct a security clearance application (SCA) on October 16, 2003. 
Applicant responded ”no” to question 2 on the SCA asking if since the age of 16 or in 
the last seven years had she used a controlled substance. Applicant admits in response 
to the SOR that she purchased and used cocaine weekly from April 1993 until June 
2012, and that her response to question 27 was false. (SOR 2.a) 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs. 
3 
 
Applicant reported on her May 7, 2015 e-QIP in response to question 23 
concerning illegal drug use that she used cocaine once a month from April 1993 until 
May or June 2012. (Item 2) She admitted in the September 14, 2015 PSI that she 
purchased and used $20 of cocaine every week from April 1993 until May 2012. She 
admits she is still friends and in contact with one of the people that used cocaine with 
her. (Item 4, PSI, at 5) On the May 7, 2015 e-QIP, Applicant noted in response to 
question 25 on the e-QIP concerning investigations and clearances that she was 
granted eligibility for access to classified information in September 2005.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decision shall be “in terms of eh national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1 (b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified and sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The illegal use of a controlled substance to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or 
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 
U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. (AG ¶ 24) 
 
Applicant admits that she purchased and used cocaine weekly from April 1993 
until June 2012 while being eligible for access to classified information. Cocaine is a 
controlled substance. These facts raises the following Drug Involvement Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any substance misuse;  
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia;  
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
5 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken  to overcome this 
problems, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any further involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility: 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which the drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant admits to purchasing and using 
cocaine weekly from April 1983 until June 2012. Her misuse was frequent, recent, and 
deliberate. Based on the available evidence, I am not convinced she has stopped 
misusing cocaine. Even if she has stopped, she could easily use cocaine again since 
she misused the illegal substance for almost 20 years and only reported stopping 
recently. Her misuse could happen again.  
 
 Applicant was granted eligibility for access to classified information in September 
2005, so she misused a control substance after being granted access to classified 
information. She stated an intent not to misuse controlled substances again, but she did 
not execute an agreement to that effect. The only evidence of her intent is her 
statement not to use or abuse illegal drugs in the future. Applicant did not present any 
information or evidence of substance abuse counseling or treatment.  
 
 Applicant admits to still having contact with at least one person that used illegal 
drugs with her. There is no evidence of successful completion of a drug rehabilitation 
6 
 
program to include aftercare. Since Applicant provided no documentation to verify she 
no longer uses illegal drugs, successfully completed a drug abuse treatment program, 
or her intent not to use illegal drugs in the future, she has failed to mitigate drug 
involvement security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence that the person can be trusted to 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security 
clearance depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a 
person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot 
function properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is 
in the best interest of the United States Government.  
 While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
 Applicant’s failure to list her substance misuse on the SCA raises a security 
concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 Applicant admitted that she intentionally omitted reference to her substance 
misuse on her 2003 SCA. She fully disclosed the substance misuse on her May 7, 2015 
e-QIP. I find Applicant deliberately failed to provide correct and accurate information 
concerning her substance misuse on her 2003 SCA.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admitted substance 
misuse from April 1993 until June 2012 while being eligible for access to classified 
information. She deliberately failed to note her substance misuse on her October 2003 
SCA. Overall, these facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a :  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
TH0MAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
