 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01125 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 26, 2015. On 
June 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The 
changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on September 7, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the 
FORM on September 14, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on 
July 1, 2017.  
 
The FORM contained six items, including Item 3, a summary of a personal 
subject interview (PSI) conducted on March 26, 2015. The PSI was not authenticated as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant 
that she was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any 
corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the 
ground that it was not authenticated. I conclude that she waived any objections to the 
PSI summary by failing to respond to the FORM. Although pro se applicants are not 
expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to 
protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
2016). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.d-1.h. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i. Her admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was 
unemployed when she submitted her SCA, having been laid off in July 2014 due to a 
reduction in force by her previous employer, but she has since found employment by 
another defense contractor. She has held a security clearance since about August 
2010.   
 
 Applicant married in January 1993 and divorced in August 1994. She married her 
current spouse in October 2002. She has a 23-year-old daughter from her first marriage 
and a 14-year-old daughter and 12-year-old son from her current marriage. She 
attended a community college and received an associate’s degree in December 2001.  
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $41,700, which are 
reflected in credit reports from September 2015 (Item 4) and January 2016 (Item 6). All 
the debts alleged in the SOR became delinquent after Applicant was laid off, except for 
the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, on which the last activity was in October 2010.  
 
 In August 2014, Applicant hired a debt-relief law firm, and she has made monthly 
$1,000 payments to the firm since that time. In her answer to the SOR, she stated that 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d-1.h were being managed by the law firm, 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
and she submitted a statement from the law firm reflecting that it is managing 20 debts, 
of which 13 were “open” and seven were paid in full as of July 11, 2016. Two debts to 
the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a had been paid in full, but it is not clear whether the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a has been resolved, because the account numbers reflected 
on the statement from the law firm do not match the account number for the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is reflected on the law firm’s statement as paid in 
full, and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are reflected as open and unresolved. 
The law firm’s statement reflects six delinquent debts to the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.d, one debt to the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, and one debt to the creditor alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.h, but the account numbers on the statement do not match the account 
numbers for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h. Five creditors are listed on 
the law firm’s statement that are not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, stating that the account was in 
her husband’s name. The September 2015 credit report reflects that she is an 
authorized user in this account. (Item 4 at 7.) As such, she is not legally liable for this 
debt.  
 
 Applicant denied the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, stating that she was 
unaware of any medical debts in her name and had not received any bills or notices 
from a medical creditor. She stated that she was unable to contact the medical provider 
because no provider’s name is reflected on the credit reports. However, the September 
credit report reflects a mailing address for the collection agency. There is no evidence 
reflecting that Applicant or her law firm has disputed this debt with the collection agency 
or the credit bureaus. 
 
 From the limited information in the record, it appears that Applicant’s law firm 
provides debt-negotiation services, but there is no evidence that it provides financial 
counseling to its clients. There is no evidence in the record regarding Applicant’s current 
income and expenses. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
 
 4
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Applicants have the ultimate burden of demonstrating their suitability for being 
granted a security clearance. ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . . 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish 
three disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) 
(“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 6
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. She has not received financial counseling within the meaning of AG ¶ 20(c) and 
her financial situation is not yet under control. The law firm’s statement reflects that only 
one of the debts alleged in the SOR has been resolved and that Applicant has more 
unresolved delinquent debts than are alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are partially established. Applicant’s loss of employment 
was a condition beyond her control, and she acted responsibly by hiring a law firm to 
assist her and making monthly $1,000 payments to the firm since August 2014. She has 
resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and her law firm is attempting to resolve the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. However, she has not submitted evidence that the 
law firm is addressing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i, and she 
has taken no actions to resolve those debts herself. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant denied the medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, she has not disputed the debt with the collection agency or the 
credit bureaus.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. Because Applicant requested a determination 
on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate her credibility and 
sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 
2003).  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
Applicant has taken a step in the right direction by hiring a law firm to assist her. 
She has a plan to resolve some of her delinquent debts, but she has not shown that the 
plan encompasses most of the debts alleged in the SOR. Furthermore, the law firm’s 
statement reflects that she has many more delinquent debts than were alleged in the 
SOR. She has provided no evidence indicating that she is financially able to eventually 
resolve all her delinquent debts. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating the evidence before me in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not carried her burden of mitigating the 
security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. 
 
 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
