 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 16-00631 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana for medical purposes between July 2011 and 2016, 
and he expressed an intention to continue doing so in the future. He did not mitigate the 
resulting security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
(AG). SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date, including this one.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of 
the new AGs did not affect my decision in this case.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 19, 2016. He requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 7, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1-3. Applicant received the FORM on September 13, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or note any 
objections to the Government’s evidence. The SOR and Applicant’s answer (combined 
as Item 1) are the pleadings in the case. Items 2 and 3 are admitted into evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on July 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, and he both admitted and denied SOR ¶ 
1.b, with explanations. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He and his wife have been married since 1979. They 
have two grown children. He has been employed with a defense contractor since July 
2015. In connection with his employment, he submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA) in September 2015.2 
 
 When he submitted his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he began using marijuana 
in July 2011, and that he used marijuana as recently as September 2015. He used 
marijuana about two times a week. He disclosed that he had a medical marijuana card.3 
In his December 2015 background interview, Applicant indicated that he used marijuana 
to ease the liver pain from his hepatitis. He obtained the marijuana through a 
prescription, and it costs about $42. His medical marijuana card was issued in March 
2011. He said he uses marijuana at home. He does not socialize with others who use 
the drug. He indicated that he was likely to continue using it.4 
 
Under Guideline H, the government alleged: that Applicant used marijuana from 
July 2011 “to present;” that he intends to continue using marijuana in the future; and 
that he obtained a medical marijuana card in March 2011.  
 
                                                          
1 The new Adjudicative Guidelines are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Item 3.  
  
3 Item 2 at 33-34.  
 
4 Item 3 at 4.  
 
3 
 
 
In his answer, Applicant stated:  
 
I have been prescribed marijuana legally by my physician. In [Applicant’s 
home state], medical marijuana is legal. I use medical marijuana as 
prescribed by my physician for my disability. My reliability, trustworthiness, 
loyalty, and integrity should not be in question because I am not using an 
illegal drug, or misusing a prescribed drug. I am and will continue to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations.5 
 
Concerning his intent to use marijuana in the future, Applicant said, “I admit and 
deny. Explanation: I will use medical marijuana as legally prescribed by my physician. 
However, I cannot predict the future.”6 He acknowledged obtaining a medical marijuana 
card on the recommendation and approval of his physician, due to his medical 
condition. Applicant also indicate that supervisors and co-workers could attest to his 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, loyalty, integrity and attendance record. He 
provided no documentation supporting his assertions that his marijuana use was for 
medicinal purposes, or was legal under state law.7 He provided no documentation from 
any references.8  
 
Policies 
  
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”10 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
5 Item 1. 
 
6 Item 1.  
 
7Applicant’s home state does have a medical marijuana program (see 
http://www.health.ri.gov/healthcare/medicalmarijuana/for/patients/), though Applicant did not submit any 
documentation to verify his statements that his marijuana use accords with it.  
 
8 Item 1  
 
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”).  
 
10 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that can cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with 
their intended use can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 
U.S.C 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline 
to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse.  
 
On October 25, 2014, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued guidance 
regarding adherence to federal laws prohibiting marijuana use. The memo cited 
guidance from the U.S. Department of Justice making it clear that no state can 
authorize violations of federal law, including violations of the Controlled Substances Act, 
21 U.S.C 801, which identifies marijuana as a Schedule 1 controlled substance. Under 
federal law, use of marijuana remains unlawful. The DNI reaffirmed that the disregard of 
federal law concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana is relevant in national 
security determinations, regardless of changes in state laws concerning marijuana 
use.11 
 
As the DOHA Appeal Board has held in a case involving an applicant’s use of 
medical marijuana:  
 
State laws allowing for the legal use of marijuana in some limited 
circumstances do not pre-empt provisions of the Industrial Security 
Program and the Department of Defense is not bound by the status of an 
applicant’s conduct under state law when adjudicating that individual’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.12  
 
Applicant began using marijuana in July 2011, after he obtained a medical 
marijuana card. He has continued using marijuana until at least August 2016, when he 
answered the SOR. He intends to continue using marijuana as prescribed by his 
physician. Notwithstanding the indications that his marijuana use is for medicinal 
                                                          
11 See Memorandum from Director of National Intelligence, “Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting 
Marijuana Use,” dated October 25, 2014, located at https://www.chcoc.gov/sites/default/files/ODNI-policy-
guidance-adherence-to-federal-laws-prohibiting-marijuana-use.pdf. The memo refers to the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Access to Classified Information which were then in effect. As addressed 
above, those AGs have been superseded by the new AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Nonetheless, the 
DNI’s policy guidance is applicable.  
 
12 ISCR Case No. 14-03734 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2016) (relying on the DNI Memo). 
 
 
6 
 
 
purposes and may be allowed under state law, the above disqualifying conditions apply 
to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.13  
 
Applicant obtained a medical marijuana card in March 2011. This fact may be 
indicative of his intention to use marijuana for medicinal purposes. However, an 
applicant’s mere possession of such a card, whether issued by a licensed physician 
pursuant to applicable state law or otherwise, is not, by itself, disqualifying under 
Guideline H. SOR ¶ 1.c is found for Applicant.14  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all  drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility; 
 
No mitigating conditions apply. Applicant used marijuana between July 2011 and 
August 2016 about twice a month to relieve his pain due to a medical condition. He 
indicated (but did not document) that his marijuana use is prescribed by his physician 
and allowed under state law where he lives. These circumstances do not mitigate his 
marijuana use. He indicated that he intends to continue using marijuana as prescribed. 
His marijuana use is recent and frequent. He has not established that it occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. Indeed, to the contrary. AG ¶ 26(a) does 
not apply.  
                                                          
13 Both Guideline H and Appendix B of the June 8, 2017 Adjudicative Guidelines reference Public Law 
110-118 (the Bond Amendment), and note that it is applicable to Guideline H. See SEAD-4 at Guideline 
H, Fn. 1. Under Appendix B (Bond Amendment Guidance), “heads of agencies are prohibited from 
granting or renewing national security eligibility for any covered individual who is a controlled user of a 
controlled substance . . .”  See SEAD-4, App. B, ¶ 1 (PROHIBITION). The Bond Amendment was made 
effective on January 1, 2008. See SEAD-4, App. B. I therefore considered potential application of the 
Bond Amendment to this case. However, I note that the Government did not allege the Bond Amendment 
in the SOR. I therefore decline to apply it to the Applicant so as to statutorily prohibit him from access to 
classified information.  
 
14 This is not to condone or endorse Applicant’s possession of a medical marijuana card, but merely to 
conclude that his possession of such a card, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, is not, by itself, specifically 
disqualifying under the listed AGs in ¶ 25 of Guideline H.  
 
7 
 
 
 Similarly, while Applicant acknowledged his marijuana use, he has not 
acknowledged that his use was illegal. He has not provided any evidence of any actions 
taken to overcome his marijuana use. He has not established a pattern of abstinence. 
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate 
the drug involvement security concerns over his use of marijuana. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
      
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
