 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 16-01578 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant is indebted to 22 creditors in the approximate amount of $36,000. 
Additionally, he failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 through 
2014, and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2014. He failed to 
produce documentation to show he resolved any of his delinquencies or delinquent tax 
returns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 8, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On June 29, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2016. (Item 3.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) On September 30, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
seven Items, was mailed to Applicant on September 30, 2016, and received by him on 
October 14, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30 days allotted, which ended 
November 13, 2016. DOHA assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 
through 7 are admitted into evidence.1  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He has worked for his current employer, a government 
contractor, since April 2012. On his SF-86, he listed that he was unemployed from 
September 2011 through April 2012. He was divorced from his ex-wife in February 
2013. He married his second wife in May 2015. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to 23 creditors in the approximate amount 
of $45,000. Additionally, he was alleged to have failed to file Federal income tax returns 
for tax years 2011 through 2014, and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 
through 2014. Applicant admitted to the tax filing issues and debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.d through 1.y. He denied the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c, claiming that the 
“debt has been paid off.” Applicant’s debts appear in credit reports dated December 23, 
                                                 
1 Item 5 is an unauthenticated report of personal subject interviews conducted June 4, 11, and 16, 2015; 
November 19, 2015; and January 6, 2016. Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM or 
affirmatively waive any objection to Item 5, I will consider only those facts in Item 5 that are not adverse to 
Applicant unless they are also contained in other evidence or included in the admissions in his answer to 
the SOR. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
2014, and April 14, 2016. (Items 6 and 7.) Applicant attributes his debts to his divorce. 
(Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 through 
2014, and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2014. On Applicant’s SF-
86, he disclosed that he failed to file and pay his 2010 state income taxes. (Item 4.) He 
also indicated he was paying $400 per month to resolve this issue. He again claimed to 
be “in the process of making payments” on his state tax debt in his Answer. (Item 3.) He 
denied other instances of failing to file or pay his Federal, state, or other taxes as 
required by law on his SF-86 (Item 4), but later admitted both allegations concerning his 
unfiled Federal and state taxes in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b in his Answer. (Item 3.) No record 
evidence established that the delinquent returns have been filed. They are unresolved. 
(Item 4 at p. 29-30.)  
 
 Of Applicant’s 23 delinquent debts, Applicant claimed in his Answer that SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.p, and 1.y “ha[ve] been paid off.” (Item 3.) He noted, “Upon looking closely you 
will see some of these debts are duplicates,” without any further explanation. (Item 3.) 
Applicant’s credit report dated April 14, 2016, reflects the debt in ¶ 1.c as a charged-off 
auto account with a balance of $9,578, and It appears to remain delinquent. (Item 7.) 
However, SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.y, which are owed to the same creditor in the amounts of 
$8,127 and $11,532 respectively, are reflected on Applicant’s December 23, 2014 credit 
report with the same account number, and as such is a duplicated entry on the SOR. 
This debt is listed as an open collection account with a balance of $11,532. It is 
unresolved. (Item 6.) Applicant admitted, and the credit reports establish that the rest of 
his delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.o, and 1.q through 1.x) remain unresolved. 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
 
 
4 
 
 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15, states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
 
5 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant is indebted on 22 delinquent accounts (as SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.y are the 
same debt) in an amount exceeding $36,000. He has documented no action to resolve 
these delinquencies. Further, he failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 
2011 through 2014, and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2014. The 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift 
the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since 2010, are unresolved, and continue 
to date. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s 
unemployment from September 2011 through April 2012 and his divorce from his ex-
wife in February 2013, were circumstances beyond his control. However, he did not 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to his 
debt or his obligations to file Federal and state income tax returns annually, which would 
be necessary for full mitigation under this condition. He has been fully employed since 
April 2012, yet he has not documented steps taken to resolve his SOR-listed 
delinquencies. Moreover, he continued to fail to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns through at least 2014. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of responsible action with respect to his 
delinquent debts or filing his Federal and state income tax returns. There is no 
discernable evidence of a good-faith effort to repay those debts in the record. The 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Applicant indicated that he had an arrangement with his state taxation authority 
to repay his outstand tax debt. However, he failed to present documentation of any such 
arrangement. Further, he mentioned no such arrangements with the Federal tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed. As a general rule, "[f]ailure to file tax returns 
suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established 
governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is 
essential for protecting classified information." (ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 25, 2016).) The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial 
difficulties. He failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or 
permanent behavioral change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial 
irresponsibility. His ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that he did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.o:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant2 
  Subparagraphs 1.q through1.y:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
2 This allegation is found for Appellant to avoid having the debt, which is duplicated in the proper amount 
in SOR ¶ 1.y, count twice. 
