 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00481 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 18, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) A security investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant on October 31, 2015. (Item 3) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On June 7, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
 
2 
 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016, admitting the 11 allegations of 
delinquent debt and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy under Guideline F. He elected to have the 
matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on July 28, 2016. (Item 7) Applicant received a complete file 
of relevant material (FORM) on August 3, 2016. He was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on July 1, 
2017.   
 While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017.  Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will 
consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school in June 1999, and served ten 
years on active duty in the Navy from January 2000 to November 2010. He received an 
honorable discharge as a petty officer second class when as he left the Navy. Applicant 
married in June 2001 and has three children and a stepchild. Since his discharge from 
active duty in January 2001, he has worked for various DOD contractors as an aircraft 
mechanic and technician. He has been employed by his present DOD contractor 
employer since September 2014. He received eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 I considered Applicant’s case under both the September 1, 2006 AGs, and the June 8, 2017 AGs. My 
decision would be the same under both AGs. 
 
3 
 
 
information in February 2005,-and has held a security clearance since then. (Item 2, e-
QIP, dated February 18, 2015; Item 3, PSI, dated October 31, 2015). 
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated February 11, 2016; Item 5, 
dated March 6, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: three credit 
card debts used to purchase personal items in collection to different creditors for $4,837 
(SOR 1.a), $4,105 (SOR 1.b), $1,044 (SOR 1.c); a telephone debt in collection for $469 
(SOR 1.d); a medical debt in collection for $125 (SOR 1.e); four communication debts in 
collection for $119 (SOR 1.f) $95 (SOR 1.g), and $95 (SOR 1.h) $1,152 ( SOR 1.k); a 
judgment for $1,005 for past due rent from 2010 (SOR 1.i); a medical debt in collection 
for $138 (SOR 1.l). Also listed is a Chapter 7 bankruptcy action that was filed in 
December 2008 with debts discharged in April 2009. (SOR 1.j) The total amount of 
delinquent debt is approximately $13,000. When Applicant’s debts were discharged by 
bankruptcy in April 2009, more than $200,000 of debts were discharged.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the delinquent debts in the SOR. On the e-QIP, Applicant 
noted the repossession of three vehicles. The repossession debts were not included in 
the SOR. In the PSI, Applicant noted the delinquent debts but provided no details about 
the debts. He thought some debts may be included in the bankruptcy, but he did not 
provide any information to verify that those debts may be included in the bankruptcy. It 
should be noted that the SOR debts were incurred in 2011 and 2012, after the 
bankruptcy was discharged in 2009. The only potential explanation for his delinquent 
debts offered by Applicant was that he and his wife were having problems keeping up 
with their debts 
 
 Applicant did not provide any documents to reflect payment of debts or efforts to 
resolve the debts. He did not present any documents to show that he contacted 
creditors to make payment or settlement arrangements. He did not provide any 
evidence of efforts to pay, settle, compromise, dispute, or otherwise resolve any of the 
delinquent debts. 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admits, that he has delinquents debts 
incurred after he had debts discharged in bankruptcy. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 The Applicant has not raised any information to refute or mitigate the financial 
security concerns. Nevertheless, I considered the following Financial Consideration 
Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible 
means of resolving debt. Accordingly, Applicant took a proper financial action when he 
filed the bankruptcy petition in 2008 with discharge of debts in 2009. However, 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts that arose after the bankruptcy are numerous, recent, and 
not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The debts are mostly 
normal credit cards, consumer loans, and medical debts. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information to explain how and why he incurred 
delinquent debt. He was advised in the FORM that he needed to provide proof of 
payment or resolution of the debts. He has not documented his plan, if any, to resolve 
his financial problems and any efforts to pay and resolve his delinquent debts. He also 
did not provide information concerning financial counseling. Accordingly, he has not 
established a good-faith effort to pay his debts.  
 
 Applicant has been gainfully employed since at least 2000, including military 
service. He seems to have the ability to resolve his delinquent debts. However, he has 
not acted responsibly because he has not provided information on his plans to pay his 
delinquent debts that arose after his 2008 bankruptcy petition. There is no clear 
evidence that his debt problems have been resolved. His finances are not under control. 
Overall, he has not provided evidence or proof that he acted with reason and 
responsibility towards his finances. His lack of documented actions to resolve his 
financial problems are a strong indication that he may not protect and safeguard 
classified information. In sum, Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s ten years of 
honorable service in the Navy and that he has successfully been eligible for access to 
classified information for over 17 years. In requesting an administrative determination, 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, he failed to supplement the 
 
7 
 
 
record with relevant and material facts regarding his financial circumstances; to 
adequately articulate his positions; and to provide facts to mitigate the financial security 
concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence provided by Applicant to establish 
that he paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his 
delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating or substantial documents and 
details to explain his finances.  
 
 Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of his finances and a 
consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. His lack of demonstrated financial 
action is a firm indication that he may not adequately safeguard classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
