 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01617 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney 
 
 
July 31, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 23, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR on October 20, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (RSOR.) The case was assigned to me on November 
21, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
hearing on February 6, 2017, and the hearing was held as scheduled on March 21, 
2017.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented 
seventeen documents, which were identified and entered into evidence without 
objection as Exhibits A through L. The record was left open until April 14, 2017, for 
receipt of additional documentation. Several additional documents were timely received 
and have been entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits M through O. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 29, 2017. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as described 
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
 Applicant is 30 years old.  He is unmarried, and he has one three year old 
daughter, who lives with her mother. Applicant pays $700 a month for child support. 
Applicant's daughter lives in a state a great distance away from him, and Applicant 
makes an attempt to see her every other month. He is a high school graduate, and he 
attended trade school to become an Air Frame and Power Plant Technician. Applicant 
is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in 
connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Tr at 19-24.)  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding financial difficulties under 
Adjudicative Guideline F. Both SOR allegations will be discussed below: 
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to timely file Federal tax returns 
for tax years 2013, 2104, and 2015, as legally required. Applicant admitted this 
allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that he failed to file the 2013 Federal tax returns 
because, after he completed the 2013 tax return, he realized that he lacked the funds to 
pay his debt to the Government. He added that his financial priorities were focused on 
his newborn daughter and his father, who was sick from cancer and died in 2014. He 
had requested that his employer deduct from his salary enough money so he would not 
owe the Federal Government taxes, but they had failed to do so. Additionally, he wrote 
that he failed to file his 2014 Federal tax return because he lacked the W2s from his 
employer, and failed to file his 2015 Federal tax return because he forgot to do so. 
Finally, he concluded in his RSOR that he filed his federal tax returns for tax years 
2013, 2014, and 2015 in September 2016, and he has set up a payment plan with the 
IRS to pay his Federal debts.   
 
 
3 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that prior to tax year 2013, he had timely filed 
his Federal tax return each year as required. (Tr at 25-30.) He admitted that he knew it 
was mandated by law that he file Federal and State law that he must filed tax returns 
each year, but he reiterated the same reasons as he cited in his RSOR for why he failed 
to file tax returns. He stated that he, “didn’t think it would be a huge consequence for 
delaying [the tax return filing] for a year or two.” (Tr at 27-28.)   
 
 1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to timely file State A tax returns 
for tax years 2013, 2104, and 2015, as legally required. Applicant admitted this 
allegation in his RSOR, and he wrote that the same situation that applied to his failure to 
file his Federal tax returns, as reviewed above, also applied to why he failed to timely 
file his State A tax returns for tax years 2013, 2104, and 2015.  
 
Applicant testified that he had lived in State A from 1996 through 2009 and again 
from 2011 through August 2015. (Tr at 25-27.) Applicant further testified that the 
Federal returns have been filed for the three years in question, and he does owe 
approximately $760 to the Federal government for tax year 2013. He also stated that he 
has filed State A tax returns for tax years 2013, 2014, and 2015, and he owes about 
$860 for State A taxes. Applicant testified that at his attorney’s suggestion, he has taken 
out a loan from his current 401k, and he is planning to use the proceeds of the loan to 
pay off his debts to the Federal Government and State A. Finally, Applicant averred that 
he has timely filed his 2016 tax returns. (Tr at 28-31, 41.)  
 
Applicant conceded that when he completed his Security Clearance Application 
in 2015, he became even more aware of the importance of filing his tax returns, but, “I 
just put it off” until he received the SOR. He finally filed the Federal and State A returns 
in 2016, after he received the SOR. Applicant conceded that his failure to timely file his 
tax returns was because of procrastination and the worst decision that he ever made, 
and he plans to file his returns in a timely manner in the future. (Tr at 31-34.)  
 
Applicant submitted several documents in an attempt at mitigation, which have all 
been reviewed. They include: Applicant's biography (Exhibit A); four positive letters of 
recommendation (Exhibit B); a Personal Financial Statement (Exhibit C); an Employee 
Performance Review (Exhibit D); a Certificate of Counseling showing he took a financial 
counseling course (Exhibit E); a Statement of Intent to timely file his tax returns in the 
future. (Exhibit F.)  Other submissions included: three IRS transcripts (Exhibits G, H, 
and I); a letter from State A regarding Applicant's tax status (Exhibit J); a document 
regarding his 401k loan (Exhibit K); proof of filing Applicant's 2016 tax returns (Exhibit 
K); and proof of making State A and Federal tax payments. (Exhibits M and N.)       
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
 
6 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling. 
 
Applicant knowingly and willfully failed to timely file his Federal and State A tax 
returns for tax years 2013, 2014, and 2015. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 19 (f) in this case:   
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Because Applicant filed his overdue Federal and State A tax returns and 
made arrangements to pay his delinquent Federal and State A taxes, mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 20 (g) can be considered applicable in this case. However, I also 
considered that the resolution of his tax issues and delinquencies occurred, not 
 
7 
 
after he completed his Security Clearance Application, but only after an SOR was 
issued against him, and he understood that his failure to follow the rules and laws 
regarding taxes would result in a denial of his receiving a security clearance.  
Therefore, I am not convinced that Applicant has established he will follow the 
legal requirements regarding taxes in the future. I find that mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(g) has not been established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
