 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02962 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her financial delinquencies 
and falsification on her security questionnaire. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2017. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4 were admitted into 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued 
on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all 
adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A was 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on May 31, 2017. I received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On May 11, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the SOR 
referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006, 
I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 2017, 
pursuant to SEAD 4. The parties acknowledged receipt of my order and raised no 
objection.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.c.) and two 
falsifications (SOR ¶¶ 2.a.-2.b.). Applicant admitted the three delinquent debts. Although 
she admitted the falsification allegations in her response to the SOR, she denied 
deliberately falsifying her responses to the security clearance application.3 Therefore, 
Applicant is found to have denied the falsification allegations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. Since graduating from high school in 1984, Applicant has 
been gainfully employed by four different companies. She had two periods of 
unemployment, from January to May 2009 and from September 2015 to January 2016. 
Since February 2016, she has been employed full time as a DOD contractor. She has 
been divorced from her second husband since June 2010, and she has two sons – ages 
20 and 23.4 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and her February 2016 credit report establish the three 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.c.),  totaling approximately $73,000. Between 2004 and 2007, 
Applicant co-signed on three student loans for her niece. She understood at the time that 
she was financially liable for the debts as a co-signor. The student loans became 
delinquent in 2010. She recalled receiving correspondence about the student loans 
several years ago when they became delinquent, and the correspondence from the 
creditor continued every few months since then. She contacted her niece to ascertain her 
niece’s plan to resolve the delinquent student loans, and it is Applicant’s understanding 
that no payments have been made on the student loans. There is no documentary 
evidence that Applicant initiated any debt-resolution efforts beyond contacting the creditor 
in May 2017.5 
 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I; Tr. 13-14. 
 
3 Tr. 9. 
 
4 GE 1; GE 2. 
 
5 GE 2; GE 3; AE A; Tr. 28-33, 63. 
 
 
3 
 
 In April 2015, Applicant had an altercation with her son’s girlfriend, wherein 
Applicant slapped the other woman. A few months later, Applicant was charged with 
simple assault. When presented with the charge, she drove herself to the police station. 
She was handcuffed and booked at the police station, hired an attorney, and appeared in 
court. She was placed on probation for one year and ordered to complete anger-
management classes. 6 
 
 After spending several weeks completing her security clearance application (SCA), 
Applicant signed and submitted it on January 19, 2016. She responded “NO” to the 
following questions: 
 
Section 22 – Police Record 
In the past seven (7) years, have you been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against you? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, have you been arrested by any police officer, 
sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, have you been, charged, convicted, or 
sentenced of a crime in any court? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, have you been or are you currently on probation 
or parole? 
 
Section 26 – Financial Record 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include obligations for which you were the sole debtor, 
as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor). 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? (Include 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).7 
 
 As to Section 22, Applicant admitted she was worried she might lose her job if her 
employer learned that she was on probation, and that concern contributed to her 
omissions. When initially questioned by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator during her June 2016 security interview, she denied having been arrested in 
the previous seven years. Only after being confronted with her 2015 arrest and criminal 
charge did she admit the arrest, charge, and probation. Applicant testified that she did not 
list her arrest, criminal charge, and probation because she believed that the simple 
assault charge was not within the scope of the question. She further explained that she 
                                                          
6 GE 2; Tr. 43-56. 
 
7 GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
did not believe she was arrested because she drove herself to the police station before 
being handcuffed and booked.8 
 
 As to Section 26, Applicant explained she did not list the delinquent student loans 
on her January 2016 SCA because she did not believe they were within the scope of the 
question. Moreover, the student loans were not on her mind since she was the co-signor. 
When initially confronted by the OPM investigator during her June 2016 security interview, 
she denied any charged-off accounts, but later admitted the three delinquent student 
loans when confronted.9  
 
 Applicant has not received any financial counseling. She has been about two 
months behind on her rent payments for over a year. Her monthly rent ($1,000) is a 
significant portion of her monthly income ($1,200).10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
8 GE 2; Tr. 43-45, 60-62. 
 
9 GE 2; Tr. 39, 60-62. 
 
10 Tr. 36, 72. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s three delinquent debts total approximately $73,000. The Government 
produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).11 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
                                                          
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s three debts became delinquent in 2010. Since 2010, Applicant has 
received regular correspondence from the creditor seeking payment for the debts. 
Applicant’s failure to make any debt-resolution efforts casts doubt on her reliability and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond her control, and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had periods of unemployment in 2009 
and 2015. These events constitute circumstances beyond her control in the context of AG 
¶ 20(b). 
  
Notwithstanding her periods of unemployment, there is no documentary evidence 
of a debt-resolution plan or steps taken in furtherance of such a plan to address these 
three delinquent student loans in the last seven years. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling, and she has been behind on 
her rent for over one year. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”12 As 
discussed above, this is no evidence of any debt-resolution efforts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply. 
  
Applicant’s periods of unemployment contributed to her financial problems. 
Nonetheless, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts or evidence 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
7 
 
demonstrating financial responsibility. I find that Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status,  determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified her responses to Sections 22 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.) and 26 (SOR ¶ 2.a.) of her January 2016 SCA. Applicant admitted she was 
aware that she was arrested, charged, and placed on probation at the time she completed 
the SCA. She further admitted she was concerned that she might lose her job if her 
employer learned about the criminal charge and her probation. Applicant’s explanations 
that she did not list her arrest, criminal charge, and probation – because she drove herself 
to the police station and because it was a simple assault charge – are not credible in light 
of the totality of the evidence. The Government established that Applicant deliberately 
falsified her responses to Section 22 (SOR ¶ 2.b.). AG ¶ 16(a) applies as to SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
 Applicant omitted her delinquent student loans on her January 2016 SCA. She 
received correspondence from the creditor for several years, and she was aware that 
these accounts were delinquent. Applicant explained that she did not believe these 
accounts fell within the scope of Section 26. Given her level of education and that she 
was the co-signor on these dated student loans, I find her explanation credible. AG ¶ 
16(a) does not apply as to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
 The following mitigating condition is potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant did not make prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omissions of her 
arrest and criminal charge. After submitting her SCA in January 2016, she was 
interviewed by an OPM investigator in June 2016. She initially confirmed her negative 
response that she had not been arrested in the previous seven years. Only after she was 
confronted by the OPM investigator with the arrest and criminal charge did she disclose 
information about the incident. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
  
 Applicant deliberately omitted her arrest, criminal charge, and probation on her 
January 2016 SCA. She has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns arising 
from this falsification. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant made no debt-resolution efforts on the three delinquent student loans, 
which have remained delinquent since 2010. In addition, her deliberate falsification on the 
January 2016 SCA casts significant doubt as to her trustworthiness, reliability, and good 
judgment. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.13 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
