 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-00305 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Frank J. Flanagan, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 19, 2015. On 
June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 11, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (SOR Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
October 27, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. On February 
28, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
the hearing was scheduled for March 29, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. I appended to the record a letter that the Government sent to Applicant as 
 
2 
 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s exhibit list as HE II. At the hearing, 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. One witness testified on behalf of Applicant. At Applicant’s request, I left the 
record open to April 19, 2017. Applicant timely provided additional documents which I 
admitted as AE B through H, without objection. I appended to the record a letter 
Applicant provided with his post-hearing submission as HE III, and post-hearing emails 
as HE IV. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 7, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date of the hearing, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. Having considered 
both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have been the same had I 
applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At the hearing, I granted Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR, 
without objection, to add an additional Guideline F allegation under paragraph 1, as 
follows: 
 
 k. You filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on or about July 14, 2016.3  
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant, age 56, married his wife in 1994. They have three children, ages 20, 
17, and 15. He has another adult child from a previous marriage. He graduated high 
school in 1979 and has taken some college courses. In 2000, he retired after having 
honorably served in the U.S. Navy for 20 years. He has actively maintained a DOD 
security clearance since he began his naval career in 1980. Applicant has been 
employed primarily by defense contractors following his naval retirement. He has 
worked for his current defense-contractor employer since September 2016.5  
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Tr. at p. 6-8. 
 
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from the SOR 
Answer, the SCA (GE 1), and the summary of Applicant’s October 14, 2015 interview with an investigator 
in connection with this security-clearance investigation (GE 2). 
 
5 See also Tr. at pp. 21-38, 48-57, and 98. 
 
 
3 
 
Between 2009 and 2013, Applicant was laid off three times due to contract-
funding issues. He was unemployed for approximately four months between 2009 and 
2010, seven months in 2011, and ten months between 2013 and 2014. While he 
received unemployment compensation, it was insufficient to meet the expenses of a 
family of five, which resulted in the debt alleged in the SOR and the foreclosure of his 
former primary residence (not alleged).6   
 
Applicant relocated with his family from State A to State B as a condition of his 
employment with the contractor that hired him in 2010. He owned a home in State A. 
Initially, he rented the home to acquaintances with the expectation that they would 
eventually buy it. However, they ultimately abandoned the home after damaging it and 
failing to pay rent. Despite best efforts, Applicant was unable to continue paying both 
the mortgage for the home in State A and the rent for his family’s primary residence in 
State B after another layoff. He chose to pay the rent. To avoid foreclosure, Applicant 
worked with a realtor to sell the home and completed the “reams of paperwork” 
requested by his mortgage lender, who eventually advised that they were unwilling to 
modify the loan. A 2012 foreclosure absolved Applicant of any liability for the mortgage-
loan.7  
 
The SOR, as amended, alleged nine delinquent debts totaling $19,255 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.i), failure to timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2000 
through 2004, as required (SOR ¶ 1.j), and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in July 2016. 
(SOR ¶ 1.k). Applicant admitted each allegation. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.i were resolved through the bankruptcy, which was discharged in October 
2016. He has not incurred any new delinquent debt and lives within his means, having a 
few hundred dollars left over after paying expenses each month.8  
 
Applicant was initially reluctant to file bankruptcy on moral grounds, preferring 
instead to resolve his delinquent debts on his own. He contacted his creditors to 
negotiate payment arrangements. He moved in with his in-laws before downsizing from 
a 2,400 square foot house to a 1,500 square foot apartment. Having never lived an 
extravagant lifestyle even before his financial problems began, he and his wife further 
reduced expenses by driving old cars, bargain and thrift-store shopping, and otherwise 
“cutting corners” wherever they could. While unemployed and actively seeking gainful 
employment in the defense field, he worked a variety of whatever low-paying jobs were 
available to help him provide for his family. For example, he worked for a roofing 
company and Walmart, ran a sandwich shop, did “lobstering,” and sold cutlery door-to-
door.9  
 
                                                          
6 See also Tr. at pp. 21-38, 48-57, and 98. I will consider the foreclosure only for purposes of evaluating 
mitigation and whole person. 
 
7 See also GE 3 and 4; Tr. at pp. 29-33, 38, 57-65, 88-89, and 95-96. 
 
8 See also AE A and C; Tr. at pp. 8, 79-83. 
 
9 Tr. at pp. 35-36, 38-39, 43-45, 50-52, 60-61, 65-73, 98-100. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant did not timely file his 2000 through 2004 federal tax returns. He 
attributes the delay to having bought and sold a home and his daughter being born 
during that period. He eventually filed those returns in 2008 and received refunds for 
each year. Since then, he has timely filed his returns.10 
 
Applicant’s two 2015 credit reports, proffered by the Government, reveal an 
“unreleased” $62,820 federal tax lien filed against him in 2008. Applicant stated, during 
his 2015 subject interview and at the hearing, that he did not owe any outstanding IRS 
tax debt. He received a refund of $1,500 from the IRS in 2015 and anticipated one for 
2016. His bankruptcy petition did not reference any tax liens. The Government’s did not 
allege it as a concern in the SOR or specifically question Applicant about it at the 
hearing. In light of these facts, I consider the lien to have been either reported in error or 
resolved.11 
 
Applicant’s wife testified at the hearing. She corroborated Applicant’s testimony 
about how they accrued their delinquent debts and the efforts they made to resolve 
them before filing bankruptcy.12 Applicant and his wife were candid, sincere, and 
credible at the hearing. Applicant is highly regarded for both his trustworthiness and 
work performance by his current supervisor and two former co-workers. Applicant and 
his wife received financial counseling through the bankruptcy, and even before that, 
developed an effective system to manage their finances.13  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”14 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”15 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”16 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
                                                          
10 See also Tr. at pp. 73 -75. 
 
11 GE 3 and 4; AE A at p. 7; Tr. at pp. 73-75. 
 
12 Tr. at pp. 92-105. 
 
13 AE D through H; Tr. at p. 91. 
 
14 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
15 Egan at 527. 
 
16 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
5 
 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”17 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.18 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”19 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.20 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.21 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.22 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”23 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”24 
 
                                                          
17 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
18 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
21 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
24 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . 
 
 Applicant’s financial indebtedness and his failure to timely file his federal income 
tax returns (as required), establish three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations), and AG ¶ 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required).  
 
 I find that the security concerns raised in the SOR have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
Applicant acted responsibly by filing for bankruptcy to address debts caused by 
circumstances beyond his control. Before that, he proactively worked to improve his 
financial position by contacting his creditors to negotiate payment arrangements, by 
availing himself of employment opportunities whether within or without of his field, and 
by downsizing and otherwise adjusting his expenses to conform with his means. 
Applicant resolved the issue of his untimely filed tax returns over nine years ago, and 
has not filed late since then. Applicant received financial counseling through bankruptcy 
and, even before that, established a successful system to manage his finances 
responsibly. Given the circumstances under which he incurred his delinquent debt and 
failed to timely file his returns, and in light of the responsible manner in which he 
resolved both issues, I conclude that his finances are now under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his financial indebtedness, and by his failure to timely file his income 
tax returns. Accordingly, Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information.  Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
