 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-02276  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 5, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 17, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 16, 2016, which was certified on 
November 18, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  The case 
was assigned to me on January 17, 2017.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 7, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 
11, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  The Government offered five 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection.  He also testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on April 26, 2017. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He is married with two adult children.  He has a high 
school diploma and four years of college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as 
a Team Lead. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.   
 
 Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.   
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax return for tax 
year 2013.  It also states that Applicant failed to file his state income tax returns for tax 
years 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014.  Applicant admits each of the allegations.  
Applicant has worked for the Department of Defense in some capacity since 2000.  He 
has held a security clearance at times during that period without a security violation or 
any disciplinary action. 
 
 Applicant attributes his failure to file his income tax returns to marital problems.  
For a while things were good, and then their relationship declined.  At some point, his 
wife took control of the finances.  Applicant signed his checks over to her.  He does not 
understand why his income taxes were not filed on time as they had always filed jointly.  
At some point he and his wife separated, but agreed to remain living together until their 
children have graduated from college.  One of the many problems is that his wife has 
 
 
3 
 
 
claimed all of the college costs that he has paid.  Nothing more than that has been 
achieved regarding his income tax returns. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has failed to file both his Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2010 through 2016.  He believes his tax liability will be about 
$100,000.  He has not contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or the state tax 
authorities to make arrangements to file to pay his taxes as of yet.  He is currently trying 
to obtain some paperwork from his wife that he needs.  He has given himself to the end 
of the summer as a deadline.  (Tr. p. 30.)  He has a 401K with his employer that is worth 
about $100,000.  (Tr. pp. 30-31.)  He also owns a home that has about $500,000 in 
equity. 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s delinquent credit card account that was 
charged off in the amount of approximately $3,418 remains owing. Applicant claims that 
he settled the debt.  He has provided no documentation to support his payment.  Due to 
Applicant’s honesty and truthfulness regarding other matters, I find that he paid the 
debt.  Allegation 1.g is found for the Applicant.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
  
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to file state and federal income tax returns for 
the past six years, specifically years 2010 through 2016.  He also has delinquent credit 
card debt that remains owing.  Admittedly, he and his wife have been in marital discord.  
This does not excuse his failure to file income tax returns for six years.  Under these 
particular circumstances, there is no acceptable excuse.  These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes one condition in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
Applicant has not acted responsibly under unforeseen difficult circumstances that 
were completely beyond his control, and there are no clear indications that his financial 
issues are under control. He simply ignored filing his tax returns for many years. The 
record establishes no mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who understand his responsibilities to file his income taxes and took no action to file his 
income tax returns.  He has not contacted the tax authorities, nor has he paid his past 
due taxes.  In fact, he has done nothing other than to wait for his wife to find paperwork 
he needs to file.  Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He has not met 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
