 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ------------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00578 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from her use of marijuana during 
2014-2015, after being granted a security clearance in 2003. Accordingly, this case is 
decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on October 30, 2015. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on July 30, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
 
2 
 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline H for drug involvement and 
substance misuse and Guideline E for personal conduct (consisting of a cross-
allegation to the Guideline H matters).   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 22, 2016. Her response consisted of a 
one-page memorandum; she admitted the SOR allegations except for the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.b; and she requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Her response did not include supporting documentation.   
 
On September 15, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it September 30, 2016. She did not reply within 30 days from 
receipt of the information as required under the Directive. The case was assigned to me 
on July 3, 2017.    
 
Procedural Matters 
 
While this case was pending decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The 2017 AG supersede the AG 
implemented in September 2006. The 2017 AG are applicable to any adjudication made 
on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have decided Applicant’s case under the 2017 
AG. I also considered this case under the 2006 AG, and my decision is the same using 
either set of AG.   
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 4, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the December 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required 
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 The Directive provides no exception to the 
authentication requirement. Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to 
the general rule that prohibits consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
 
3 
 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that she understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, given 
the lack of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my 
decision.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for her 
employment with a federal contractor. She has worked for the same aerospace 
company since 2003. Her educational background includes a bachelor’s degree in 
mechanical engineering awarded in 2002 and a master’s degree awarded in 2007. She 
has never married; she has no children; and she has lived with a cohabitant since 2013.  
 
The DOD granted Applicant a secret-level security clearance and access to 
classified information in 2003, shortly after she began her current employment.3 In 
conjunction with that action, Applicant disclosed in her February 2003 security 
clearance application that she used marijuana three times in 1999, apparently when she 
was a college student.4  
 
Applicant completed her most recent security clearance application in October 
2015.5 In doing so, she explained that her previous security clearance lapsed or was not 
renewed after ten years, because her job did not require her to maintain a security 
clearance. She also disclosed that she used marijuana three times during 2014-2015. 
She explained that she smoked the marijuana in a social setting with close friends on 
three separate occasions; it did not affect her in any particular way; and she last used 
marijuana in May 2015, about five months before she completed the security clearance 
application.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted using marijuana three times during 
2014-2015. She stated that she has no desire to use marijuana now or in the future. 
She further stated that she had not used marijuana since May 2015 and she had 
avoided environments where marijuana was present. She denied a continued 
association with people who use illegal drugs. She explained that the person she 
smoked marijuana with is no longer using marijuana, and that she had no knowledge of 
family, friends, or associates who currently use marijuana. She acknowledged that her 
use of marijuana demonstrated questionable judgment, but pointed out that she had 
been truthful and candid about her marijuana use during the security-clearance process. 
 
 
                                                          
3 Exhibit 5.  
 
4 Exhibit 3.  
 
5 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
4 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.6 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”7 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.8 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.9 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.10 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.11 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.12 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.13 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.14 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
5 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline H for drug involvement and substance misuse, the concern is 
that the “illegal use of controlled substances, and the use of other substances that 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about [a person’s] reliability and trustworthiness, 
both because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.”16 In apply Guideline H to the facts of this case, I note that in an 
October 24, 2014 memorandum, the Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the 
disregard of federal law concerning use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana is relevant in 
national security determinations regardless of changes in state laws concerning 
marijuana use. Marijuana remains a Schedule I controlled substance under federal law, 
which means as a matter of law it is a drug that has no currently accepted medical use 
and has a high potential for abuse.17  
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.  
 
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s illegal use of marijuana in reaching a 
decision in this case. She used marijuana three times in 1999 while she was a college 
student. That substance misuse is fairly characterized as youthful experimentation and 
is not a concern here. But her more recent substance misuse requires greater scrutiny. 
She used marijuana three times during 2014-2015, when she was a seasoned, mature 
adult working in a responsible position. Having previously been granted a security 
clearance in 2003, she knew or should have known marijuana was off limits. Although 
she did not have access to classified information during 2014-2015, she was still 
employed by an aerospace company doing business in the defense industry, which 
presumably had a drug-free workplace policy that prohibited illegal drug use. Given her 
age and maturity at the time and her knowledgeable participation, her unlawful use of 
marijuana during 2014-2015 raises serious doubts about her reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment.  
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 24.  
 
17 For information on federal drug schedules, go to http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml.  
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant presented little in the way of mitigation. She did not provide sufficient 
evidence to establish that future marijuana use in some other situational event or set of 
circumstances is unquestionably ruled out. Nevertheless, she receives credit in 
mitigation because she voluntarily reported the information about her marijuana use. 
Her willingness to self-report is certainly an important aspect of this case. But I remain 
concerned due to Applicant’s most recent episode of marijuana use during 2014-2015. 
Accordingly, the concern under Guideline H is not mitigated.  
 
 Applicant’s unlawful use of marijuana creates doubt about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant18 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E   For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant19 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
18 Disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts is a relevant fact in this case. It is also a 
mitigating condition under the guideline. Continued association is not, however, a disqualifying condition 
under the guideline. On this basis, SOR ¶ 1.b is decided for Applicant.  
 
19 The allegation under Guideline E, which is simply a cross-allegation to the Guideline H matters, is 
decided for Applicant, because the reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment concerns are 
essentially one and the same under both guidelines 
 
