 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00104 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
Sean M. Bigley, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
July 27, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 14, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 14, 2016, scheduling the hearing for November 9, 2016. The hearing was 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection, but no Hearing Exhibit for Administrative Notice. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called one witness. Applicant presented 15 documents, 
which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through O, and admitted without 
objection. The record was left open until December 9, 2016, for receipt of additional 
documentation. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on November 17, 
2016.  On April 22, 2017, Applicant’s Counsel submitted a post-hearing motion noting 
the new Adjudicative Guidelines, referred to in footnote 1. Applicant’s Counsel argued 
that application of the new Adjudicative Guidelines vitiated the security concerns of the 
allegations in Paragraph 1. Department Counsel agreed; and as a result, on April 24, 
2017, withdrew the allegations under Guideline C. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the remaining allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.d. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 16.) She has been employed with the defense contractor since December of 2013. 
(GX 1 at page 16.) She is married to a U.S. citizen, and has one native-born American 
child, age six. (TR at page 26 line 18 to page 31 line 21, and GX 1 at pages 24 ~26 and 
30.) She came to the United States in 2003 “on a student visa,” and obtained a Ph. D. 
from an American university in 2008. (TR at page 26 line 18 to page 27 line 25.) 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2011. (GX 1 at page 7, and AppX 18.) 
 
 2.a. Applicant’s 73-year-old mother is a citizen and resident of Iran. (AppX B at 
pages 1~3.)  She is a retired accountant, having worked with a “telecommunication 
company.” (Id.) She also has permanent resident status with the United States. (TR at 
page 40 lines 18~24.)  Applicant’s mother has no connection with the Iranian 
government. (TR at page 38 line 12 to page 40 line 14.) 
 
 2.b. Applicant’s 67-year-old father is a citizen and resident of Iran. (AppX B at 
pages 3~4.)  He is a retired high school teacher. (Id.) He also has permanent resident 
status with the United States. (TR at page 40 lines 18~24.)  Applicant’s father has no 
connection with the Iranian government. (TR at page 38 line 12 to page 40 line 17.) 
 
 2.c. Applicant’s two brothers, ages 39 and 38, are citizens and residents of Iran. 
(AppX B at pages 5~8.)  The eldest brother is “a designer for a construction company,” 
and the youngest is “a civil engineer.” (TR at page 41 lines 9~14.) Applicant has applied 
for permanent U.S. residence status for both of her brothers. (TR at page 44 lines 
18~23, and AppX B at pages 5~8).  Neither brother has any connection with the Iranian 
government. (TR at page 41 lines 9~14.) 
 
 
3 
 
 2.d. Applicant’s 32-year-old sister is a citizen and resident of Iran. (AppX B at 
pages 8~9.)  She is an “architect,” as is her husband. (TR at page 41 line 18 to page 42 
line 5, and at page 43 line 22 to page 44 line 9.) Applicant’s sister and brother-in-law 
have no connection with the Iranian government. (Id.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
 
4 
 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s parents and three siblings are citizens and residents of Iran. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
5 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s parents have permanent U.S. resident status.  She has applied for 
that status on behalf of her two brothers. Neither Applicant’s parents nor her siblings 
have any connection with the Iranian government. Her financial and property interests 
clearly lie with the United States, as evidenced by her financial documentation as to her 
income, her home ownership, her expected Social Security benefits, and her savings. 
(AppXs D~K and M.) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
respected by her colleagues. (AppX O.) She performs well at her job. (Id.) While she 
was born in Iran, she is an American by choice. She has been residing in the United 
States for the past 13~14 years. Her closest familial ties are with her husband and child, 
 
6 
 
who are American citizens. She can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States due to her longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d.    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
