 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01829 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the sexual behavior, personal conduct, and criminal 
conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior), E (personal conduct), and J (criminal conduct). Applicant responded to the 
SOR on August 16, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 1, 2017, scheduling 
the hearing for April 6, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. Post-hearing, he submitted 
documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C and admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 19, 2017.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2015. He attended college for a period without earning a 
degree. His two marriages ended in divorce. He has five children.1 
  
 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military in 1990, when he was 18 years old. He 
married his first wife in 1992, shortly before his 20th birthday. Applicant and his first wife 
had marital difficulties. On at least two occasions in late 1992, Applicant and his wife’s 
15-year-old friend engaged in sexual activities, which included sexual intercourse. 
Applicant knew the girl was 15 years old.2 
 
 Applicant was charged in state court with the felony crime of third-degree rape, 
which is in essence statutory rape. He pleaded guilty in May 1993. He was sentenced to 
a $1,000 fine, plus court costs and restitution for the victim’s counseling costs; 180 days 
in the county jail; and probation for four years. The court order checked the block that 
indicated “Deferred Imposition of Sentence.” Applicant was ordered to be “remanded to 
the Sheriff to be incarcerated in jail July 12, 1993.” He served about five months in jail.3 
 
 Applicant receive an other than honorable discharge from the military because of 
his civilian charge. He moved to his current state of residence after he was released 
from jail. He was permitted to serve his probation in his current state. He is required by 
his state to annually register as a sex offender.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2009 and charged with criminal damage and disorderly 
conduct-fighting. He stated that he and his second wife were arguing when he pulled 
the television out by the cord, breaking the television. Applicant attended anger-
management classes, and the charges were dismissed as part of a deferred 
adjudication.5 
 
 Applicant believes that the third-degree rape conviction was dismissed after his 
probation as part of a “deferred imposition.” He submitted information from the state 
where he was convicted about judicial sealing and expungement.6 The information 
provides as follows: 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-25, 28, 43-44; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 15-21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 21, 33-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4, 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 34; GE 2-4. This incident was not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be considered in the application of mitigating conditions and in the whole-person 
analysis. 
 
6 Tr. at 36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Under section [redacted] (felony) and [redacted] (misdemeanor) of the 
[State] Code, a court may suspend imposition of sentence and place on 
probation a person with no prior convictions. Upon successful completion 
of sentence, the person is discharged without an adjudication of guilt 
[redacted], and the court “shall order” that the records be sealed.7 
 
 It is unclear whether Applicant received a suspended imposition of sentence as 
addressed above, or his sentence was simply deferred until he was remanded to jail. 
The state statute cited in Applicant’s exhibit states: 
 
Upon completion of the observance of all conditions imposed pursuant to 
[redacted], the court services officer assigned to defendant’s case shall 
bring the matter to the attention of the court, whereupon the defendant 
shall be discharged by the court. A formal entry of such discharge shall be 
entered by the clerk of courts. Discharge and dismissal under this section 
shall be without court adjudication of guilt and shall not be deemed a 
conviction for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law 
upon conviction of a crime.  
 
 Applicant submitted his judgment and sentence record, but he did not submit any 
subsequent orders from the court. He testified that he had a letter from the judge stating 
that his rights were restored because of the deferred imposition, but he lost the letter in 
a fire. The FBI identification record not does report the third-degree rape arrest, charge, 
or conviction.8 
 
 Applicant does not believe he would have been required to register as a sex 
offender if he remained in the state where the crime occurred because of the deferred 
imposition. He stated that he is working with his local sheriff’s department and his 
state’s department of safety to show cause as to why he should not have to register as 
a sex offender.9 
 
 Applicant expressed appropriate remorse for his actions. He revealed his sex-
offender status before he volunteered to coach in a youth league when his child was 
young. He was permitted to coach. His employer and his current girlfriend are aware of 
his status, but his two immediate supervisors are not.10 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
                                                          
7 AE C. 
 
8 Tr. at 36-37; GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. at 20-22, 39-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A. 
 
10 Tr. at 20-22, 27-28, 30; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
4 
 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017.11 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                          
11 The SOR was issued under the previous adjudicative guidelines. I have utilized the current adjudicative 
guidelines as required. However, my ultimate decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual’s judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been 
prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant committed the felony crime of third-degree rape. He is required by his 
state to annually register as a sex offender. His behavior reflected a severe lack of 
judgment and made him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, and duress. The above 
disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
 It has been almost 25 years since Applicant’s crime of third-degree rape. He 
stated that the charge was dismissed as part of a deferred imposition and that he would 
not have been required to register as a sex offender if he remained in the state where 
 
6 
 
the crime occurred. The FBI identification record is some evidence that the charge was 
dismissed, but it is not a substitute for the actual court records. In any event, Applicant 
is still required by his state to annually register as a sex offender. The conduct 
continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.12 AG ¶ 14(b) is not applicable. Applicant has lessened, but not eliminated, his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. AG ¶ 14(c) is partially applicable. I 
find that sexual behavior concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant committed the felony crime of third-degree rape. The above 
disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s record has been reasonably, but not completely, clean since his 
criminal conduct almost 25 years ago. Nonetheless, I have unmitigated concerns under 
the same rationale discussed in the sexual behavior analysis.  
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 09-03233 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2010). The Appeal Board determined that an 
applicant’s child molestation offense “even though it occurred long ago, impugn[ed] his trustworthiness 
and good judgment.” 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant committed third-degree rape, which is in essence statutory rape. He 
carries the stigma of having to annually register as a sex offender. His conduct reflects 
questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It 
also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly applicable because Applicant’s conduct is 
sufficient for an adverse determination under the sexual behavior and criminal conduct 
guidelines. However, the general concerns about questionable judgment and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are 
established. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant is “currently a registered sexual offender due to 
[his] conviction as set forth in subparagraph 1.a, above.” SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that 
Applicant was discharged from the military under other than honorable conditions “due 
to [his] conviction as set forth in subparagraph 1.a, above.” SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b do not 
allege any conduct that is not alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
 
8 
 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are concluded for Applicant.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Under the same rationale discussed above for sexual behavior and criminal 
conduct, I find that Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find that personal conduct concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline, D, E, and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the sexual behavior, personal conduct, and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
