 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01745 
  ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under the 
guidelines for financial considerations and personal conduct. National security eligibility 
for a position of trust is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On November 11, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for re-investigation. On June 10, 2016, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Previous Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006. This decision applies the New AGs 
that became effective on June 8, 2017.1  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 8, 2016 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
                                            
1 I considered the Previous AGs, as well as the New AGs. My decision would be the same if the case was 
decided under the Previous AGs. 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 28, 2016. It issued a Notice of Hearing 
on December 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 18, 2017. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through D into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 26, 2017. The record remained open until 
February 15, 2017, to give Applicant an opportunity to provide additional exhibits. 
Applicant did not submit any documents and the record closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 35 years old and married since 2011. He and his wife have a young 
child and are expecting their second. Applicant earned an associate’s degree in 2013. 
His wife has worked as a school counselor for about a year. He started working for a 
defense contractor in 2004. He has held a position of trust since then. His last two 
performance evaluations noted that he exceeds expectations. His supervisor is aware of 
this investigation and the underlying security issues. (Tr. 17-19.)  
 
Applicant began experiencing financial problems after he and his wife purchased 
a house in 2013 for about $140,000 or more. He soon learned that he did not have 
enough money to pay a mortgage, credit cards, and lines-of-credit. He did not 
adequately budget his finances, and consequently began accumulating delinquent 
debts. (Tr. 20-24.)   
 
Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) from December 2015, the SOR alleged 
12 delinquent debts, which became delinquent between 2013 and 2015, and totaled 
$16,772. (Tr. 21; GE 3.) The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
1. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The $2,770 debt is owed to credit card company. It became 
delinquent in 2013. It is unresolved. (Tr. 32, 34.) 
 
2. (SOR ¶ 1.b) The $1,098 debt is owed to a credit card company. It became 
delinquent in 2013. It is unresolved. (Tr. 32.) 
 
3. (SOR ¶ 1.c) The $965 cell phone debt became delinquent in 2013. It is 
unresolved. (Tr. 32.)  
 
4. (SOR ¶ 1.d) The $901 debt is owed to a credit card company. It became 
delinquent in 2013. It is unresolved. (Tr. 32.)  
 
5. (SOR ¶ 1.e) The $796 debt is owed to credit card company. It became 
delinquent in 2013. It is unresolved. (Tr. 32.)  
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
6. (SOR ¶ 1.f) The $333 debt is owed to a retail store. It became delinquent in 
2013. It is unresolved. (Tr. 32.)  
 
7. (SOR ¶ 1.g) The $6,211 collection account remains unresolved. In January 
2016, Applicant’s attorney notified him by letter that the creditor produced sufficient 
information to obtain a judgment for the unpaid debt. Applicant has not had any contact 
with his attorney since receiving that letter. (Tr. 26-27; AE A.) It is unresolved. 
 
8. (SOR ¶ 1.h) On January 11, 2017, Applicant arranged a monthly repayment 
plan to resolve this $1,132 credit card debt, delinquent since 2013. He was scheduled to 
make the first $15 payment on January 13, 2017. He did not provide evidence that he 
made the payment. (Tr. 29; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
9. (SOR ¶ 1.i) On January 11, 2017, Applicant arranged a monthly repayment 
plan to resolve this $913 credit card debt, delinquent since 2013. He was scheduled to 
make his first $15 payment on January 13, 2017. He did not provide evidence that he 
made the payment. (Tr. 31; AE B.) It is unresolved. 
 
10. (SOR ¶ 1.j) The $836 debt is owed to a credit card company. It became 
delinquent in 2013. It is unresolved. (Tr. 32.). 
 
11. (SOR ¶ 1.k) On January 11, 2017, Applicant arranged a monthly repayment 
plan to resolve this $634 credit card debt, delinquent since 2013. He was scheduled to 
make his first $15 monthly payment on January 13, 2017. He did not provide evidence 
that he made the payment. (Tr. 31; AE D.) It is unresolved. 
 
12. (SOR ¶ 1.l) Applicant stated he paid this $183 cable debt and would produce 
a paid receipt. He did not submit one. (Tr. 25.) It is unresolved. 
 
After receiving the SOR, Applicant contacted some creditors. He also spoke 
briefly to a financial counselor at his company’s employee assistance program. (Tr. 21-
22.) Applicant’s annual salary is $37,000 to $38,000 and his wife earns between 
$47,000 and $48,000. (Tr. 23.) They do not have a written budget. (Tr. 52.) Applicant 
has not filed Federal income tax returns for 2015 and 2016. He spoke to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) and thinks he owes under $5,000 in unpaid taxes for those 
years.2 He anticipates beginning a payment plan in the future. (Tr. 49-50.) 
 
When Applicant completed “Section 22: Police Record” of his 2015 e-QIP, 
Applicant failed to disclose an October 1998 arrest for possession of marijuana. 
Applicant said he disclosed that information in his 2004 e-QIP. (Tr. 38; GE 2.) Applicant 
said he misunderstood the question and thought that he did not need to disclose it in the 
2015 e-QIP because he thought it was too old and had been expunged from his record. 
                                            
2 The SOR did not allege Applicant’s failure to file Federal tax returns for 2014 and 2015, or his failure to 
pay taxes for those years, as eligibility concerns. Those facts will not be analyzed as disqualifying 
conditions, but may be considered under the analysis of mitigating conditions and the whole-person 
concept, and an evaluation of Applicant’s credibility.   
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(Tr. 39-40.) Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing it in his second e-QIP is credible. 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a is found in his favor. 
 
When he completed “Section 26: Financial” in his November 2015 e-QIP, 
Applicant failed to disclose any of delinquent SOR debts. He said he did not intend to lie 
about his debts, but admitted that he was aware of the delinquent debts. He did not 
think they would come up in the investigation because they were too recent. He 
intended to address them if the government inquired about them. He knows he made a 
mistake by not disclosing them. (Tr. 41-44.) During a background interview in January 
2016, a government investigator asked him if he had any delinquent debts. Initially, 
Applicant said, “No,” until the investigator confronted him about the debts listed on his 
credit report. (Tr. 45.) Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing the delinquent debts is 
not credible. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AGs. These 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, 
describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
information. See Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets out the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.3  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy delinquent debts 
that began accumulating in 2013 and remain unresolved. The evidence raised the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
financial problems have been ongoing for about four years, and cast doubt on his 
reliability and good judgment. There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(b), because Applicant’s financial problems did not arise from conditions that 
were beyond his control. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Applicant does not have a solid budget or plan to resolve old debts, nor are there 
indications that his debts, finances, and unfiled Federal tax returns for 2014 and 2015 
are under control.  
 
A few days before this hearing, Applicant contacted several creditors and 
proposed resolution of the debts through minimal monthly payments. He presented no 
evidence that he made the first payments, which were due before this hearing. There is 
no evidence of any good-faith efforts on his part to resolve delinquent debts, including 
unpaid Federal taxes for 2014 and 2015. The evidence does not establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets out the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
Applicant knew he had delinquent debts when he completed the 2015 e-QIP and 
chose not to disclose them. When confronted by a government investigator about his 
delinquent debts, he initially lied to the investigator before admitting them. The evidence 
established both of the above disqualifying conditions as to Applicant’s failure to 
disclose delinquent debts. The allegation regarding his failure to disclose previous 
marijuana use was found in his favor.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides two conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised in this case and include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant did not make a good-faith effort to correct his financial omissions after 
he submitted his 2015 e-QIP. In fact, he initially denied having delinquent debts when 
questioned about them during a background interview. Falsifying or concealing 
requested information during the investigative process is not a minor offense and casts 
doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. The evidence does not 
establish mitigation under either of the above conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a) requires an administrative judge to evaluate an applicant’s national 
security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person concept. Under AG ¶ 2(c) the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must include 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. The administrative judge should also consider the 
following nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 35-year-old man, 
who has worked for his employer since 2004 and held a position of trust during that 
time. In 2013, he began experiencing financial difficulties after purchasing a house, 
which resulted in the accumulation of delinquent debts that are unresolved. Immediately 
prior to his hearing, on January 21, 2017, he contacted several creditors listed on the 
SOR and established minimal repayment schedules. Up to that time, he has not taken 
responsible action to address his financial obligations. Additionally, he failed to file 
Federal tax returns and pay taxes for 2014 and 2015. In listening to his testimony, I 
found his understanding of the importance of financial responsibility, both for delinquent 
debts and tax obligations, inadequate and irresponsible. Those facts, coupled with his 
decision to lie to the government about his debts demonstrate a pattern of poor 
judgment. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s present national 
security eligibility. Applicant did not mitigate the financial and personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
          Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:       For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.b:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
position of trust. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
