 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00963 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) A security investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant on December 9, 2015. (Item 4) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On June 24, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
 
2 
 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are 
effective for decisions issued after that date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 1, 2016, admitting the nine allegations of 
delinquent debt under Guideline F. She elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 9, 2016. (Item 7) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 24, 2016. She was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on June 1, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, 
the Administrative Judge could determine that she waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so she did 
not raise any objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by 
Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 52 years old. She graduated from high school in June 1983, and received a 
bachelor’s degree in 2010. Applicant married in September 1984 and divorced in June 
1986. She married again in August 1997 and was widowed in December 2005. She has 
not remarried. She has one child and a stepchild. Applicant has been employed in 
various administrative and operational positions mainly in the medical field. She has 
been employed as an operations associate by a DOD contractor since November 2014.  
 
 Applicant worked for the same company as an administrative coordinator from 
February 1996 until March 2011. She then relocated her family and found employment 
in her field. In July 2013, she accepted a job offer but it was rescinded before she 
started work due to changes in the company. She was then unemployed. She worked at 
a minimum wage job until November 2013 when she accepted employment with 
another company. She left that company in November 2014. The contract she worked 
under ended in August 2015. She was unemployed from August 2015 until January 
2016 when she started working in her present position. 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 5, dated June 1, 2016; Item 6, dated 
September 19, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: medical debts 
in collection for $130 (SOR 1.a), $60 (SOR 1.b), $244 (SOR 1.c),$157 (SOR 1.d), and 
$77 (SOR 1.i); two credit card debts in collection for $532 (SOR 1. e), and $468 (SOR 
1.f); a repossessed car debt for $5,403 (SOR 1.g); and student loans in collection for 
approximately $40,293. The total amount of delinquent debt is approximately $47,364. 
The majority of the debt is from student loans. The credit reports show that the debts 
became delinquent in the last few years, most starting in 2011. This was the time period 
she reported that she was unemployed and underemployed. 
 
 Applicant listed the delinquent student loans and repossessed car debt on the e-
QIP. In the PSI, Applicant acknowledged these debts as well as the credit card and 
medical debts. She reported that her financial problems started shortly after the death of 
her husband in 2005. The periods of unemployment she experienced contributed to her 
financial problems. In the PSI, she stated that her financial situation was more stable. 
She now has medical benefits, so she did not anticipate additional medical debts. (Item 
3, PSI, at 4-6 
  
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant attributes much of her delinquent debts to 
underemployment, unemployment, and lack of medical benefits. She wrote that she has 
been paying her medical debts and anticipated resolving them shortly after she 
submitted her response. She also stated she was making payment arrangement for the 
credit card debts. She reported that she has been in communication with the car loan 
creditor and would start making payments under a payment plan shortly. As for her 
student loans, she stated that she made payments in a student loan forgiveness 
program, brought the accounts current, and would start making regular payments in 
May 2016.  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documents to verify the claims of payments or 
effort to resolve the debts that she made in her PSI or SOR responses. She did not 
present any documents to verify that she contacted creditors to make payment or 
settlement arrangements. She did not provide any evidence or receipts for her efforts to 
pay, settle, compromise, dispute, or otherwise resolve any of the delinquent debts. 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet her financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admitted, that she has delinquent medical, 
credit card, student loan, and car loan debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet 
her financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial 
issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The debts are 
normal consumer, medical, and student loan debts. Applicant had periods of 
 
6 
 
 
unemployment and underemployment. In her response to the SOR, however, Applicant 
did not provide sufficient information to explain how these events led to the delinquent 
debts. In addition, Applicant claims to have made payments on and resolved most of 
her medical debts, that she was making payment arrangements for the credit card 
debts, and that her student loans were current. She claimed to be negotiating a 
payment arrangement on the delinquent car loan. Applicant was advised by Department 
Counsel in the FORM that she needed to provide proof of her claims of payment or 
resolution of the debts. She has not documented her plans to resolve her financial 
problems or her claimed efforts to pay and resolve her delinquent debts. She also did 
not provide information concerning financial counseling. Accordingly, she has not 
established a good-faith effort to pay her debts.  
 
 Applicant has been gainfully employed since at least November 2013. She 
seems to have the ability to resolve her delinquent debts. However, she has not acted 
responsibly because she has not provided information on her plans to pay her 
delinquent debts. There is no clear evidence that her debt problems have been 
resolved. Her finances are not under control. Overall, she has not provided evidence or 
proof that she acted with reason and responsibility towards her finances. Her lack of 
documented actions to resolve her financial problems are a strong indication that she 
may not protect and safeguard classified information. In sum, Applicant did not present 
sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to provide her plan 
to pay her delinquent debts. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant 
chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, she failed to supplement the record with 
 
7 
 
 
relevant and material facts regarding her financial circumstances; to adequately 
articulate her positions; and to provide facts to mitigate the financial security concerns. 
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence provided by Applicant to establish that she 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved her 
delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating or substantial documents and 
details to explain her finances.  
 
 I am unable to determine that Applicant reasonably and responsibly managed 
her finances and that her finances are under control because Applicant failed to provide 
documents to verify the appropriate management of her finance and actions to resolve 
financial issues. In short, Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of her 
finances and a consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. Her lack of 
demonstrated financial action is a firm indication that she may not adequately safeguard 
classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has not 
established her suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate financial security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
