 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 16-00640 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dominique Sims, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 On May 24, 2015, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI) by 
alcohol. On January 21, 2016, she pleaded guilty. She completed all court-ordered 
requirements. She ended her alcohol consumption in October 2015, expressed remorse, 
and completed an alcohol-education program. Alcohol consumption and criminal conduct 
security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 8, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). On June 17, 
2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, which became effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                         
 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under 
Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and J (criminal conduct).  
 
On July 28, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
August 26, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On January 10, 2017, the 
case was assigned to me. On February 27, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for March 14, 2017. (HE 
1) Applicant waived her right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of the 
hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 10-11) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant offered 
five exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 16-14, 29-32, 48, 58; Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3; Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A-E) On March 22, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. On 
May 24, 2017, Applicant provided one document, and it was admitted without objection. 
(AE F) The record closed on May 24, 2017. (Tr. 61) 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing then National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted the SOR allegations. She also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information.   
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old facility security officer (FSO) who has worked for the 
same defense contractor for 16 years. (Tr. 18-19) In 1984, she graduated from high 
school. (GE 1) She did not attend college. She has held a security clearance for 30 years, 
and there is no evidence of a security violation or abuse of illegal drugs. (Tr. 20; GE 1) 
 
Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct  
 
On May 24, 2015, Applicant drank two 24-ounce beers at her mother’s house. (Tr. 
22, 40; GE 2) Then she stopped at a restaurant and drank two margaritas. (Tr. 22-24, 41) 
On her way home she was stopped by the police, and she was arrested for DWI. (Tr. 25) 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
Her blood test indicated her blood alcohol content (BAC) was .15.2 (Tr. 42) The next duty 
day she reported the DWI to her security officer. (Tr. 26-27) 
  
On January 21, 2016, Applicant pleaded guilty, and she was sentenced to pay a 
fine,3 to perform 50 hours of community service, to complete a 12-hour DWI education 
program, to attend a victim-impact panel, to 16 months of probation, and to maintain an 
alcohol-interlock device on her vehicle during her probation. (Tr. 29-38, 43-44) She 
completed all sentencing terms, including her probation. (Tr. 29-38, 44; AE A-AE F) She 
has a misdemeanor-level criminal conviction for DWI. 
 
Before her May 24, 2015 DWI arrest, Applicant consumed alcohol once or twice a 
week. (Tr. 21) She usually drank about two drinks. (Tr. 27) She most recently consumed 
one drink of alcohol on her 50th birthday in October 2015. (Tr. 44) She was not diagnosed 
as alcohol dependent. (Tr. 21) Her only criminal charge is the May 24, 2015 DWI charge. 
(Tr. 27)    
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant was promoted in March 2016 to FSO. (Tr. 40) Her supervisor for the 
previous two years described Applicant as reliable, trustworthy, dedicated, dependable, 
and diligent. (Tr. 51-52; SOR response) Applicant reported to her supervisor the next duty 
day after the DWI that she was arrested for DWI, and Applicant admitted that she 
committed the DWI offense. (Tr. 54-55; SOR response) Applicant was disappointed in 
her own lack of judgment; she accepted full responsibility for her DWI; and she felt sincere 
remorse for her DWI. (Tr. 55-57; SOR response) Her supervisor recommended that 
Applicant retain her security clearance. (Tr. 56) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
                                            
2 Rate and magnitude of alcohol consumption, body weight, and time of testing are variables that 
can be used to predict blood alcohol content. See Cleveland Clinic website, http://www.clevelandclinic.org 
/health/interactive/alcohol calculator.asp; Nolo website, http://dui.drivinglaws.org/calc.php. 
   
3 Applicant said she “paid a total of $4,508 for fees, fines, probation, programs, and in total the 
DWI has cost her about $11,000. (SOR response) 
 
4 
                                         
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
 
5 
                                         
 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶ 22 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol4 to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
   
  An Administrative “Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the 
applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an 
applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted). 
 
  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant’s single alcohol-related incident involving 
the police and courts happened on May 24, 2015. Her BAC was .15, establishing that she 
engaged in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired judgment.    
   
  AG ¶ 23 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
                                            
4 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines, the generally 
accepted definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA 
Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/ 
NewsletterNumber3.pdf. “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United 
States.” See the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration 
(BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and 
when women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. 
 
6 
                                         
 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
   
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a fairly 
lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 
3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).     
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption. She has a sustained period 
of alcohol abstinence; she expressed her remorse about her poor judgment; she has a 
good record of employment; she received education about alcohol abuse; she 
successfully completed her probation; she paid a heavy penalty for DWI; and she only 
has one alcohol-related conviction. The evidence has resolved my doubts about 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Alcohol consumption 
security concerns are mitigated.   
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) does not apply because she committed one DWI offense. AG ¶ 31(b) 
applies. The SOR alleges and the record establishes Applicant committed one 
misdemeanor-level criminal offense involving alcohol and the court. Applicant admitted 
the incident of criminal conduct. 
 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense; 
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
For the reasons indicated in the previous section, criminal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated. Her single misdemeanor-level DWI offense does not create doubt 
about her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and raise questions about her ability 
 
8 
                                         
 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. She has ended her alcohol 
consumption, and there is sufficient assurance that criminal conduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines G and 
J are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old FSO who has worked for the same defense contractor 
for 16 years. She has held a security clearance for 30 years, and there is no evidence of 
a security violation. Applicant has a sustained period of abstinence. She expressed her 
remorse about her DWI because it showed poor judgment. She has an excellent record 
of employment; she received a substantial penalty for her DWI; and she completed all 
court-ordered requirements. She received alcohol-related education. She has learned 
from her error in judgment, and I am convinced she will not repeat it. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Alcohol 
consumption and criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated.  
  
 
9 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
