 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01471 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 13, 2015. 
On July 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 
 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was 
issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to 
all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 
4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my 
decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 22, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a 
notice of hearing on December 13, 2016, and the hearing was convened on February 2, 
2017. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A and B. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old electronics maintenance support technician employed 
by a defense contractor since February 2014. He graduated from high school in 2003 and 
served in the Army National Guard from 2005 to June 2013. He deployed to Iraq in 2008-
2009, and was honorably discharged as an E-4. He was previously employed from 2011 
to 2012 as a government contractor where he volunteered for an overseas assignment. 
He was most recently unemployed from July to October 2014, and from November 2010 
to August 2011. He married in 2008 and has a two-year-old child. He has held a security 
clearance since 2005. 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling nearly $15,000, including a judgment 
and an $8,500 defaulted car loan. Applicant admitted all of the allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.i, and provided explanations and documents with his answer to the SOR. Applicant 
claims that his delinquent debts resulted from an auto accident in 2010, and three months 
of lost income due to the accident.2 Applicant negotiated and paid all of the debts in 2016 
after receiving the SOR, except the car loan delinquency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and a 
disputed medical debt listed as SOR ¶ 1.i. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a car loan that 
Applicant could not pay. He voluntarily returned the car, and believed that it would resolve 
the balance due on the loan. After discovering otherwise as a result of his security 
clearance process, he negotiated a payment plan and made two payments in August and 
September 2016. However he stopped making payments after two months for lack of 
funds. The debt remains unresolved. 
 
Applicant’s spouse won about $28,000 (after taxes) in a state lottery. She 
purchased a wedding ring with some of the money, but Applicant convinced her to return 
it for a refund and apply some of the lottery windfall to pay-off debts. During the hearing, 
Applicant stated he was going to lose his job at the end of February 2017 because his 
company’s contract was to expire. At that time, he was at least 80 days past-due on two 
car loans and a consumer credit card account.3 He has no savings or investments, and 
$50 in his checking account, but expected a tax refund. He has not received any financial 
counseling. He intended to move his family to another state after February to seek new 
employment. 
 
                                                     
2 Tr. 51; GE 2. Presumably, his periods of unemployment also contributed to his delinquent debts. 
 
3 This evidence will not be used for disqualifying purposes, but may be used when applying mitigation and 
in the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 
 
Applicant submitted a character statement from a supervisor who generally 
described him as honest and trustworthy. His testimony was credible and sincere.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
4 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence are sufficient to establish 
the disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
5 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and numerous, and there is insufficient 
evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely 
to recur. Applicant does not have sufficient income to pay his debts. He lost three months 
of income due to a car accident in 2010, however he did not show why he did not resolve 
his debts in the years following his accident. His debts remained unpaid until after he 
received the SOR. He used a fortuitous lottery windfall to pay the smaller SOR debts, but 
he failed to make more than two payments on the largest debt for lack of funds. At the 
time of the hearing, he had incurred three additional delinquent accounts, and had 
virtually no money to pay anything but daily living expenses. He has not received financial 
counseling and his financial condition is precarious. In addition, he unfortunately expected 
to lose his job by the end of February 2017, which would seriously damage his already 
untenable financial status. 
 
Despite a relatively steady employment history since 2014 and a reallocation of 
unpredictably available resources, he did not significantly address his debts until after 
they raised a security concern, and failed to show an ability to fully resolve his largest 
debt. His financial situation after September 2016 did not improve, and he testified that 
he has virtually no money and was to lose his job by the end of February 2017. I find that 
the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20(b), (d), and (e) partially apply to acknowledge the 
debts paid or disputed, however they do not fully apply as Applicant did not resolve the 
largest debt, his overall financial condition is concerning, and additional delinquencies 
have accrued and are likely to continue. His finances are in a precarious position due to 
a lack of funds and anticipated job loss, and his financial stability raises significant 
concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
 
6 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Although Applicant made efforts to resolve a significant number of debts, he did so 
only after receiving the SOR and using an unlikely windfall. He was unable to resolve the 
largest debt for lack of funds. Applicant has not shown that he is now financially stable 
and able to adequately address his past and unalleged financial delinquencies, and his 
financial condition is precarious. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States 
to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c – 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
