 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-00736 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Donna Price, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances beyond his control. In 
response to his financial problems, he has paid several debts and embarked on a 
systematic plan to repay his remaining debts. Applicant established that his debts are 
not reflective of his judgment and reliability. He has mitigated the security concerns 
about his debts, and his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On April 24, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On June 15, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a decision without a hearing. Department Counsel sent Applicant a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) in support of the Government’s case; however, Applicant 
then retained legal counsel and requested a hearing. I received the case on February 1, 
2017.3 
 
 I convened the requested hearing on March 7, 2017. The parties appeared as 
scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4, which I 
admitted without objection. Applicant presented two witnesses and testified on his own 
behalf. He also presented 21 exhibits. Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A consists of Ax. A.1.a – 
A.1.p. Also presented were Ax. B1, B2, C1, C2, and D. Ax. A.1.a, A.1.b, A.1.d – A.1.f, 
A.1.i, A.1.l, A.1.m, B1, B2, C1 and D were admitted at hearing. Applicant submitted the 
remaining documents post-hearing. I admitted all of Applicant’s exhibits without 
objection. I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 20, 2017. The record 
closed on April 11, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $15,825 for 13 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.m). In response, Applicant admitted, with 
explanations, all of the SOR allegations. (Answer) In addition to the facts thus 
established, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He and his wife, a certified nursing assistant, have 
been married since May 1986. They have three adult children. Applicant worked 
temporarily for the defense contractor sponsoring his request for clearance in February 
and March 2015. His continued employment is contingent on obtaining eligibility for 
access to classified information. That employer has paid Applicant about $14 hourly. 
Applicant also has an opportunity for similar work at a different location at roughly $20 
an hour. This is Applicant’s first application for a security clearance. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 
108 – 110) 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Tr. 4 – 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant and his five siblings grew up in a family doing business as a 
corporation that owned beachfront hotels starting in the 1920s. Applicant had been 
working for eight years as the general manager of the family’s hotel, when their father 
died in 1984. At that time, the hotel was 22 years old and needed significant capital 
improvements. Applicant maintained the hotel as best he could, but money that 
normally would have been used for the building upkeep was instead being used to care 
for his mother, who had chronic medical problems the costs of which often exceeded 
any medical insurance the family had. In 1997, they entered into a partnership with a 
local property management company to redevelop their hotel as a franchise of a 
national hotel chain. In 1998, the old hotel business closed and Applicant’s family 
became minority owners of a new hotel to be built on the sight of their old hotel. The 
new hotel took about 18 months to build, during which Applicant had no income. 
Thereafter, he was paid $25,000 a year as an industry consultant, and his family shared 
35 percent of the net proceeds from the new hotel. (Answer; Tr. 24 – 32) 
 
 Applicant’s family ownership interest in the new hotel yielded about $350,000 
annually (divided six ways) for about seven years. Thereafter, the property management 
company with whom the family was partnered started building several new hotels with 
the same national chain. This ate into the business revenue of the original franchise and 
the family’s annual income from the original franchise fell to about $200,000. When 
Applicant’s sister challenged their partner about the loss of income, the partner sold the 
hotel out from under Applicant’s family. In 2008, after all loans, taxes, and other costs of 
sale were paid, Applicant and his siblings received about $44,000 each. For his part, 
Applicant’s only way of earning a living was in the hospitality industry. However, no one 
would hire a 53-year-old with no college education and no experience in the national 
hotel business. (Answer; Tr. 32 – 42) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems worsened in 2009, when his wife developed 
cancer. Her employer-sponsored medical insurance covered most of her medical bills, 
but many were not covered and she lost income because she could not work. By that 
time, Applicant could only work odd jobs for friends and associates. He obtained his real 
estate license, but the real estate business was greatly depressed at that time. In 2013, 
Applicant himself underwent multiple surgeries; however, this time he had no insurance 
(only his wife is covered on her policy) to cover medical bills. Additionally, Applicant 
could not work for several months. In 2014, he developed heart problems that required 
bypass surgery and another extended period when he was unable to work. He and his 
wife then moved to another state to start over but returned after a year. Before returning 
to his original state of residence, Applicant hired on with the company that is sponsoring 
his request for clearance. While he awaits the outcome of this adjudication, Applicant 
has been working sporadically for another defense contractor doing similar, albeit 
unclassified, work. (Answer; Gx. 1; Ax. D; Tr. 43 – 46, 59 - 65) 
 
 In May 2016, Applicant’s wife was injured in a hit-and-run car accident. Her car 
was a total loss and the remaining balance on their car note was paid by insurance. 
Police later caught the at-fault driver, and Applicant’s attorney has been negotiating a 
settlement that will pay Applicant’s wife’s medical bills and other damages, such as lost 
 
 
4 
 
 
wages. Applicant estimates they will receive about $20,000, and he plans to pay his 
remaining debts with those funds. In the meantime, Applicant has paid the debts alleged 
at SOR 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m. They are engaged in structured repayment plans with the 
creditors for the debts in the remaining SOR allegations. Applicant provided schedules 
for automatic debits from his bank account and records of payments made so far. His 
monthly payments are modest and will take time to complete, but he is able to pay them 
based on his current household income. Once the settlement of damages from his 
wife’s car accident is finalized, that money will be enough to pay off his remaining debts. 
To document Applicant’s commitment to using those funds for debt repayment, he 
recently obtained a high-interest loan using the anticipated settlement as collateral. 
(Answer; Ax. A.1.o; Ax. A.1.p Tr. 75 – 80, 113 - 115) 
 
 Applicant and his wife live modestly and well-within their means. They have 
moved into a small apartment and are able to meet all of their current obligations. They 
drive older model cars that were given to them by friends after their medical problems 
and his wife’s accident. References from friends and associates laud his integrity, 
professionalism, honesty, and willingness to work hard. At hearing, I found his testimony 
to be straightforward and credible. (Ax. C; Tr. 47 – 50, 82 - 83)  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are the result of a long-term confluence of adverse 
and unforeseen events. The failure of his family’s hotel business and local partnership 
in a national franchise venture left Applicant without opportunities to work in the only 
business he knew. Thereafter, a series of unforeseen medical problems hindered 
Applicant and his wife from earning enough money to meet their financial obligations. 
However, their medical problems are not likely to recur and they have documented a 
systematic approach to paying those debts they have not yet been able to resolve fully. 
Additionally, Applicant established he would commit funds from a settlement of his 
wife’s accident damages to resolve those debts that he and his wife are currently 
repaying through monthly payment plans. 
 
 Applicant has acted responsibly in the face of the medical and employment 
problems he and his family experienced. His efforts to resolve his debts reflect well on 
his judgment and reliability. In view of all of the foregoing, the continued presence of 
unresolved debts is not disqualifying. All three of the above-named mitigating conditions 
apply, and Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by adverse information 
about his finances.  
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s actions to resolve his debts, along with positive information 
about his character and trustworthiness, are sufficient to satisfy the security concerns 
raised by his financial problems. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record as 
a whole shows that Applicant has met his burden of persuasion in showing that he is 
suitable for access to classified information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
