 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00880 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AGs. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 10, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 7, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and did not offer any documents. The record was held open until 
June 21, 2017, to allow Applicant to submit documents. Applicant submitted documents 
that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, and were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record then closed.2 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on June 15, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He has some college education, but did not earn a 
degree. He served in the military from 1975 to 1979 and was honorably discharged. He 
married in 1985 and has a grown stepchild. He has worked for his current employer, a 
federal contractor, since 2011, except for a short-period of unemployment for three 
weeks in 2014. He was unemployed from January 2009 to October 2010. His wife is 
self-employed with a home business, earning about $28,000 to $34,000 annually. 
Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $84,000. Applicant’s father lives with him, but 
has his own income, although Applicant also provides financial assistance.3 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that before 2009, he and his wife were doing well 
financially, but had a high debt-to-income ratio. They paid their bills on time and interest 
rates were low on his accounts. He lost his job in 2009 and had difficulty finding a new 
one, and interest rates were then raised. He testified that he made the mistake of 
withdrawing money from his 401k pension plan. He understood that he had the option of 
having the taxes withheld upfront, but chose not to do that.4  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a federal tax lien was filed in 2015 against Applicant in the 
approximate amount of $53,247. Applicant testified that he has had a few agreements 
with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to pay the debt through an installment payment 
plan. He explained that he would miss a payment and then the agreement would be 
terminated, and he would have to start over. He testified he has an agreement with the 
IRS and provided a document that shows he has made payments of $690 in December 
2016 through May 2017. These payments were applied to tax years 2009, 2010, 2015, 
and 2016. It appears his April 2017 payment was for his 2016 tax return. He also made 
payments in February ($583), March ($690), and April 2017 ($1,286). In November 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
3 Tr. 15-19. 
 
4 Tr. 19-22. 
 
3 
 
 
2016, he made two payments of $7,789 and $7,210 that were applied to his 2009 tax 
debt. Applicant stated he received some assistance to help him set up a payment 
arrangement with the IRS. He did not receive financial counseling.5 
 
 The IRS document breaks down the years and the amount of taxes Applicant 
owes for each year: 2013 ($5,259); 2012 ($10,964); 2011 (1,346); 2010 (5,955); and 
2009 ($24,366). Those years are the basis for the federal tax lien.6 He testified that he 
has timely filed his federal and state tax returns in past years and whatever refunds he 
was due were applied to his tax debt.7  
 
 Applicant admitted owning the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.m, totaling 
approximately $70,846. He stated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($2,398) resulted in a civil 
suit, and he is making monthly payments to satisfy it. He provided a list of his debts, 
indicating the status of the debt in SOR ¶1.e ($1,718 past due on balance of $41,405) 
was current; SOR ¶ 1.h ($4,450) was paid on June 19, 2017; SOR ¶ 1.k ($6,265) was 
paid on June 19, 2017; and he has a zero balance on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($3,881). 
He did not provide documentary evidence to substantiate his payments or resolution of 
the above debts.8 
 
 Applicant testified that his mortgage loan is current. He does not own a car. He 
teleworks and rents a car because he believes it is more cost effective. He has some 
savings, but does not want to deplete it in the event he loses his job.9 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
                                                          
5 Tr. 25-28, 37; AE B. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 Tr. 38-39; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 22, 28-31, 35-37; AE C. 
 
9 Tr. 39-42; AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
 
5 
 
 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2009. He 
has a federal tax lien entered in 2015 that is unpaid. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is compliance with those 
arrangements.  
  
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period of unemployment 
beginning in 2009 to 2010, when he could not afford to pay all of his accounts. He 
subsequently withdrew money from his 401k pension plan that created tax 
consequences. He stated that he had payment arrangements with the IRS in the past, 
but missed payments and had to start over. He provided an IRS statement showing that 
he has made payments since November 2016. He failed to provide documents to 
support his assertions that he is paying his other delinquent debts. I cannot find that his 
behavior is unlikely to recur because of his inconsistent payment history. His behavior 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s unemployment was beyond his control. His high debt-to-income ratio 
was within his control. He acknowledged that he chose not to have taxes withheld when 
he withdrew money from his pension plan, which caused a significant tax consequence. 
This was within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. He testified that he had made agreements 
with the IRS to repay his tax debt, but missed payments. An IRS document shows he 
owes taxes for tax years 2009 through 2013. Applicant provided a statement saying he 
had paid some debts, but failed to provide evidence to substantiate the payments. The 
two debts he indicated he paid occurred after his hearing. He has been employed since 
late 2011. I find Applicant did not act responsibly under the circumstances and AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial counseling. There is 
evidence that he is resolving his tax debt with payments that began in November 2016, 
after he received the SOR. He testified he made other payments, but failed to adhere to 
installment agreements with the IRS. He provided a post-hearing statement indicating 
that he had paid two debts and was paying others, but he failed to provide documents to 
substantiate those payments. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that there are 
clear indications his finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was aware that when he withdrew money from his pension plan it 
would create tax consequences. He chose not to pay the taxes at the time of 
withdrawal. He did not provide evidence of any past efforts to pay his delinquent taxes 
 
7 
 
 
before a tax lien was entered in 2015. He has made consistent payments on the tax lien 
beginning in November 2016, after receipt of the SOR. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude he has made good-faith payments on his other delinquent debts. I have 
considered his recent payments to the IRS, but under the circumstances, I cannot find 
that he initiated and adhered to a good-faith effort to pay his tax debt because it did not 
occur until after a lien was entered, and his payments started after he received the 
SOR. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant did not provide evidence as to the 
specific arrangements he has with the IRS and whether he is in compliance, but there is 
evidence he has made consistent payments since November 2016. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 61 years old. He served in the military for four years and received an 
honorable discharge. He was unemployed from 2009 to 2010, but has been consistently 
employed since 2011, except for a three-week period. He was aware that he was 
required to pay taxes on money he withdrew from his pension plan, and did not. In 
2015, the IRS imposed a tax lien. Applicant recently began making consistent payments 
toward resolving the tax lien. He has other delinquent debts that are unresolved. 
Applicant has not established a reliable track record of financial stability. Although he 
testified that he had made past payments toward his tax debt, the evidence shows that 
those consistent payments did not begin until after he received the SOR. Although post-
hearing, he indicated he paid two delinquent debts, he did not provide supporting 
 
8 
 
 
documents. His conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶  E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
