 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 16-00801 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges a delinquent mortgage and three 
other delinquent debts totaling $6,400. The four debts are resolved. He has established 
his financial responsibility. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 9, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On July 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, which became effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 
AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR. On August 29, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On January 10, 2017, the case was assigned 
to me. On February 27, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for March 15, 2017. (HE 1) Applicant waived his 
right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 
13-14) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 16-18; Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-B) On 
March 23, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. Three exhibits 
were received after the hearing, and admitted into evidence without objection. (AE C-E) 
On May 15, 2017, the record closed. (Tr. 36, 51)  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations. His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old technical data writer, and a defense contractor has 
employed him since 2008. (Tr. 6, 8, 20) In 1992, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 7) 
In 2010, he received a bachelor’s degree in business administration. (Tr. 7-8; GE 1) He 
served in the Air Force from 1996 to 2007, and he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 
6-7) He has never married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 8) He has held a 
security clearance since 1996, and there is no evidence of security violations, alcohol 
abuse, or use of illegal drugs. (Tr. 20; GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges and his credit reports, SCA, and SOR establish that 
Applicant had four delinquent debts. Their status is as follows: 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent mortgage debt with a balance of $127,892 that 
went to foreclosure. In 2004, Applicant purchased his home in state A with financing from 
the Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA). (Tr. 21, 33; GE 3) In 2008, he moved to a 
different state to obtain employment with his current employer. (Tr. 22) He rented his 
home in state A; however, the rent was insufficient to make the mortgage payments. (Tr. 
22) He put the home up for sale; however, the creditor was unwilling to accept the 
purchaser’s offer of $72,000 in a short sale. (Tr. 23) The home went to foreclosure in 
2009, and Applicant does not believe the creditor is seeking any payment from Applicant. 
(Tr. 23-24) There is no evidence that Applicant engaged in fraud, misrepresentation, or 
bad faith in his involvement with the VA or the creditor.3   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a debt for $1,005. On April 4, 2017, the creditor wrote Applicant 
that the debt was not under collection because it was beyond the state statute of 
limitations. (AE C) The creditor had the account “canceled and deleted from the credit 
files.” (AE C) The debt became delinquent in 2009 because Applicant used his available 
funds in an unsuccessful attempt to keep his mortgage for his home in state A current 
and to keep his student loans current. (Tr. 25-26)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off bank debt for $4,376. On April 7, 2017, Applicant 
paid the creditor $2,800, and the debt was settled. (AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent debt for $1,025 owed to a home owner’s 
association. On April 11, 2017, the creditor wrote that the creditor was unable to locate 
any current debt Applicant owed to the creditor. (AE E) The letter said “The only item we 
were able to locate was a notice of lien recorded against the property in 2009 which was 
extinguished by the trustee sale that occurred later that same year.” (AE E) 
 
Applicant timely filed and paid his taxes. (Tr. 27) He has $123,000 in his 401(k) 
account. (Tr. 29) He said he is willing to withdraw funds from his 401(k) if necessary to 
ensure all delinquent debts are resolved. (Tr. 35) He has provided some financial support 
                                            
3 The VA loan guarantee is as follows: “For loans between $45,000 and $144,000, the minimum 
guaranty amount is $22,500, with a maximum guaranty, of up to 40 percent of the loan up to $36,000, 
subject to the amount of entitlement a veteran has available.” As to whether the VA loss on a loan must be 
repaid, the VA explains:   
 
Must the loan be repaid? 
 
Yes. A VA guaranteed loan is not a gift. It must be repaid, just as you must repay any 
money you borrow. The VA guaranty, which protects the lender against loss, encourages 
the lender to make a loan with terms favorable to the veteran. But if you fail to make the 
payments you agreed to make, you may lose your home through foreclosure, and you and 
your family would probably lose all the time and money you had invested in it. If the lender 
does take a loss, VA must pay the guaranty to the lender, and the amount paid by VA must 
be repaid by you. If your loan closed on or after January 1, 1990, you will owe the 
Government in the event of a default only if there was fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith 
on your part. 
 
Factsheet VAP 26-4 is available on the VA website at http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm= 
1&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CD4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.benefits.va.gov%2Fhomeloans%2Fdocs%2F
vap_26-4_online_version.pdf&ei=q4QbU_zSCaST0QH0mIDwAg&usg=AF QjCNFv0-ay6SGFdfcDFlaE7aENpSq0cA. 
 
4 
                                         
 
to his nephew. (Tr. 30) He uses a budget, and he has focused on paying down his debts. 
(Tr. 32) His student loans and vehicle loans are current. (Tr. 32-33) His credit reports 
show most of his debts are paid as agreed. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
A coworker, who has known Applicant since 2006, and another coworker, who has 
known Applicant since 1996, described Applicant as trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 38, 40-
41, 47-48) Their statements support retention of his access to classified information. (Tr. 
38-48)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
5 
                                         
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
 
6 
                                         
 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports and SOR response. The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and  
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
  
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
 
7 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems occurred 
when he moved from state A for employment, and the housing market precipitously 
declined in state A. He was unable to rent his home in state A for sufficient rent to make 
the mortgage payments, and he was unable to resolve the debt through a short sale. His 
mortgage lender foreclosed on his home. The mortgage loan was guaranteed by the VA, 
and Applicant does not owe anything to the SOR ¶ 1.a creditor or the VA. 
 
Three other delinquent SOR debts were delinquent because Applicant used his 
available funds in an attempt to pay the mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.a. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
to 1.d totaled about $6,400. The creditor cancelled the SOR ¶ 1.b for $1,005 and deleted 
it from the credit files. Applicant paid $2,800 and settled the charged-off bank debt for 
$4,376 in SOR ¶ 1.c. The SOR ¶ 1.d debt for $1,025 was resolved in 2009 through the 
trustee sale that resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving his debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of his debts showed good 
faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making 
progress paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously 
                                            
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old technical data writer, and he has been employed by a 
defense contractor since 2008. In 2010, he received a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration. He served in the Air Force from 1996 to 2007, and he received an 
honorable discharge. Two coworker described Applicant as trustworthy and reliable. Their 
statements support retention of his access to classified information. He has held a 
security clearance since 1996, and there is no evidence of security violations, alcohol 
abuse, or use of illegal drugs.  
 
Applicant’s SOR debts are all resolved or paid. His credit report reflects most of 
his other debts are paid as agreed. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in 
the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
 
9 
                                         
 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt payment or 
resolution as indicated in his credit reports. He understands what he needs to do to 
establish and maintain his financial responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his 
particular financial circumstances to address his delinquent debts.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
