 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01445 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for May 17, 2017. Applicant did not appear as 
scheduled, so the hearing was rescheduled and convened on May 18, 2017. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1-5 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and did not present 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), issued 
on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all 
adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
2 
 
any documents. The record closed on June 2, 2017, without any further submissions from 
either party. I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On May 11, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the SOR 
referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006, 
I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 2017, 
pursuant to SEAD 4. The parties acknowledged receipt of my order and raised no 
objection.2 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.e. Applicant did 
not object, and these allegations are found for Applicant.3 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges one repossessed vehicle (SOR ¶ 1.b.) and four collection 
accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., and 1.g.). Applicant admitted all five debts.  After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. From November 2000 to May 2014, he was employed 
full time as a computer analyst for a private corporation. He was unemployed from May 
2014 to November 2014. Since November 2014, he has been employed full time for a 
DOD contractor. He is not married, and he does not have any children. He resides with 
his mother, and he splits the mortgage and utilities with her.4 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the three credit reports establish the five alleged debts, 
which became delinquent between June 2012 and October 2014. The largest delinquent 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.b.) was for a vehicle purchased in April 2013 and repossessed in about 
October 2013. Applicant claimed that he had applied for a 401k loan to resolve some of 
the debts; however, there is no documentary evidence of this action or of any debt-
resolution efforts.5 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to several circumstances. In July 2012, 
he took an $18,000 loan from his retirement account to assist his mother in the purchase 
of a house. This loan reduced his bi-weekly paycheck by approximately $135 and 
hindered his ability to pay his vehicle loan. In May 2013, he had knee surgery, which cost 
approximately $2,000 in out-of-pocket expenses. In May 2014, Applicant was laid off from 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I; Tr. 6-8. 
 
3 Tr. 11-12. 
 
4 GE 1-2; Tr. 23. 
 
5 Response to SOR; GE 2-5; Tr. 24. 
 
 
3 
 
his longtime employer. Applicant also attributed his financial problems to procrastination 
and financial irresponsibility.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
                                                          
6 GE 2; Tr. 21-22, 27-28, 36 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s five delinquent debts total approximately $38,567. These debts 
became delinquent between 2012 and 2014. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).7 Conditions that 
could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. 
The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred between 2012 and 2014. Although he 
has been gainfully employed full time since November 2014, there is no documentary 
evidence of any debt-resolution efforts. Moreover, there is no evidence that Applicant’s 
issues of financial irresponsibility are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances largely beyond his control, and (2) Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s financial problems were partially 
attributed to his 2013 surgery and his 2014 unemployment. These events constitute 
circumstances beyond his control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b). 
  
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Notwithstanding some circumstances beyond his control, there is no 
documentary evidence of a debt-resolution plan or steps taken in furtherance of such a 
plan, particularly in light of Applicant’s employment since November 2014. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling. There is no evidence of 
Applicant’s monthly income and expenses with scheduled debt repayments to permit me 
to conclude that his financial situation is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”8 As 
discussed above, this is no evidence of any debt-resolution efforts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply. 
  
Applicant’s surgery and unemployment contributed to his financial problems. 
Nonetheless, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts or evidence 
showing financial responsibility. I find that Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
6 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to some circumstances beyond his 
control, but also to his own procrastination and irresponsibility. There is no evidence of 
debt-resolution efforts or that Applicant has taken steps to become more financially 
responsible. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b.-1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f.-1.g.   Against Applicant. 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. 9 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
