 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01365 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 20, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 28, 
2015. (Item 3.) On June 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines F and E. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2016 (Answer), and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on August 10, 2016. On August 11, 2016, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as 
Items 1 through 6. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
 
2 
 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
September 21, 2016, and did not respond. Items 1 and 2 contain the pleadings in the 
case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
July 11, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. 
Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 31, is divorced and has one minor child. He was enrolled in 
college courses from 2011 to 2013. He has worked as a security guard for a defense 
contractor since September 2015. He was unemployed in August 2015, and from 
August 2013 to February 2014. He served on active duty in the Navy from 2005 to 
2013. He received an honorable discharge.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant is delinquent on four accounts in the 
approximate amount of $35,477. These debts were identified on credit reports dated 
October 29, 2015, and March 3, 2016. They include: a $25,984 debt to a credit union 
delinquent since 2015; a $2,346 credit card account delinquent since 2016; a $4,955 
telephone bill delinquent since 2014; and a $2,192 debt owed to an apartment complex 
delinquent since 2015. Applicant admitted each of the alleged delinquencies in his 
Answer. He indicated that he planned to file bankruptcy to resolve these debts. He 
provided no documentation of any actions taken to file bankruptcy or otherwise resolve 
these debts. 
 
On September 28, 2015, Applicant signed the SCA certifying that the statements 
he made therein were “true, complete, and correct to the best of [his] knowledge and 
belief and [were] made in good faith.” Applicant answered, “No,” to each question in 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2), his SCA (Item 3), and the summary of his September 2015 subject 
interview (Item 4). Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection 
to Item 4, I will consider only those facts in Item 4 that are not adverse to the Applicant unless they are 
contained in other evidence or based upon Applicant’s admissions in his answer. 
 
 
3 
 
section 26 (Financial Record) of the SCA, and did not otherwise report the facts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. In his Answer, he claimed: 
 
I had not met the criteria, as I was engaged in legal proceedings to 
question th[e] validity of the debts incurred. Furthermore, I have not 
cancel[led] any cards, had collection agency activity, or 120 day 
delinquency at the time to the best of my knowledge, I did not meet the 
criteria. The question is not “do you have debt?,” yet a set of criteria, that I 
did NOT knowingly breach. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling or provide budget 
information from which to predict his future solvency. He offered no evidence to support 
findings concerning his good character or trustworthiness, the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable 
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
5 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s divorce and unemployment were 
conditions beyond his control, he has not acted responsibly to address the resulting 
debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant did not respond to the FORM 
and the record does not otherwise demonstrate his efforts, if any, to resolve his 
delinquencies. The record is silent as to his current ability to repay his delinquent debts, 
the reasons that they have persisted, or his plan to resolve them other than his stated 
intent to file for bankruptcy. His financial problems are not under control.  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in 
the SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
 
6 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his SCA, the following 
disqualifying condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his SCA. When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing 
alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.4 An applicant’s level of education and business experience are relevant to 
determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on an SCA was 
deliberate.5  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s comments that he was aware of some 
of his delinquent debts, but was disputing their validity at the time he completed his 
SCA. His statement that he was “engaged in legal proceedings to question th[e] validity 
of the debts incurred” indicated he had knowledge that some creditors claimed he owed 
them for delinquent debts. He should have disclosed the delinquent debts he had 
knowledge of on his SCA. Given these facts, I find substantial evidence of an intent by 
Applicant to omit, conceal, or falsify facts from and on his SCA. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is 
established. 
 
 The personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by 
any of the following potentially applicable factors in AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
7 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, none of them apply. 
Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification or 
concealment. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-advised in completing 
his SCA. Falsifying information is a serious offense and Applicant has not shown that 
similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, he failed to take responsibility 
for his actions. He has not provided sufficient information in this record to demonstrate 
that he has met his burden of proof for his personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole 
person. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, including his honorable military service, I conclude that 
Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA, and he has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
