 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01491 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns involving his 
unpaid federal taxes for tax year 2012 and his failure to file federal income tax returns 
for tax years 2012 through 2014, as required. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 4, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on September 14, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He received 
the Government’s FORM on September 21, 2016 and responded with documents that I 
have marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me 
on June 1, 2017. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 4 and AE 
A are admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns, as 
required, for tax years 2012 through 2014, and owed the IRS $4,000 in unpaid federal 
taxes for tax year 2012. Applicant admitted both SOR allegations in his response to the 
SOR.2  
 
Applicant is 27 years old. As of January 2015, he was not married, he did not 
have any children, and he had been living with his parents since March 2013.3  
 
 Applicant obtained his high school diploma in June 2008, and received a 
certificate from a junior college in August 2009. He was unemployed from September 
2008 to August 2009. He has worked for his current employer since August 2009. He 
was granted a DOD security clearance in May 2010.4 
  
 In 2012, Applicant changed his federal tax exemptions from single with zero 
exemptions to tax exempt because he needed money to pay a bill. He intended to have 
less federal taxes withheld from his paycheck for only a few pay periods, but he then 
forgot to change his exemptions back to what they had been previously. He realized his 
error when he filed his 2012 and 2013 federal income taxes in 2014, and learned that 
he owed $4,000 in back taxes. He then corrected his federal tax exemptions to single 
with zero exemptions.5   
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 Items 1-2. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Items 3-4. 
 
5 Items 2-4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his failure to timely file his 2012 federal income tax returns to 
laziness and carelessness. He indicated that he timely filed his 2013 federal income tax 
returns prior to the April 15, 2014 deadline. He stated that he failed to timely file his 
2014 federal income tax returns because the tax preparer he had hired to assist him 
was out of state until after the April 15, 2015 deadline, and he did not seek other 
assistance. As of December 2015, he intended to file his 2014 and 2015 federal income 
tax returns by April 15, 2016.6  
 
  Applicant stated that he paid between $600 and $700 in August and September 
2014 towards his $4,000 federal tax debt for tax period 2012. From September 2014 to 
December 2015, he paid the IRS $25 monthly through automatic payroll deduction. In 
December 2015, he estimated a balance of $1,800, and acknowledged that any refund 
he might be due for federal tax years 2014 and 2015 would be subject to attachment by 
the IRS to satisfy his balance.7   
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the FORM that he had filed his 2012 through 
2014 federal income tax returns and resolved his 2012 federal back taxes. Applicant 
provided a notice from the IRS dated September 26, 2016, reflecting that Applicant was 
due an overpayment of $3,693 for tax year 2014. It further reflects that the IRS applied 
$1,964 of that overpayment to Applicant’s unpaid balance for tax year 2012, and 
Applicant was due a refund of $1,728. Applicant intends to be more responsible and 
careful to not let this happen again.8   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Items 2-4; AE A. 
 
7 Items 2-4; AE A. 
 
8 Items 2-4; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed $4,000 in federal taxes for tax year 2012 and 
failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2012 through 2014, as required. 
AG ¶¶ 19 (a), 19(c), and 19 (f) are established.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant provided documentation to corroborate his claim that he filed his 
federal income tax returns for 2012 through 2014 and paid his 2012 federal taxes. AG ¶ 
20(g) applies.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns involving his unpaid federal taxes for tax year 2012 
and his failure to file federal income tax returns for tax years 2012 through 2014, as 
required. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
