 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00953 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jeffrey T. Wilson, Esq. 
 
 
July 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was delinquent on Federal tax debts for tax years 2008, 2010, 2011, 
2013, and 2014, in a total exceeding $32,000. He failed to file his state and Federal 
taxes for at least 2012 through 2014, as required. He has resolved all of his Federal tax 
debt and filed all delinquent state and Federal tax returns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 11, 2016, in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was decided 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
to the government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on November 3, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 16, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 9, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objections. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented eight 
documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H. The record was left 
open until February 16, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. On February 16, 
2017, Applicant presented one exhibit, marked AE I. Department Counsel had no 
objection to AE I, and it was admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 21, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his state and Federal taxes for at 
least 2012 through 2014, as required (subparagraph 1.a); and owed the Federal 
government a total of $22,610.88 for tax years 2008, 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2014 
(subparagraphs 1.b through 1.f). Applicant denied all of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
through 1.f. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed by a defense contractor since September 2016.2 He previously held a 
security clearance in connection with another job. He is married to a Canadian citizen, 
and has one minor child and one stepchild. (GE 1; Tr. 22-40, 49, 76.) 
  
 Applicant disclosed on his 2015 e-QIP that he owed Federal income taxes for tax 
years 2008, 2010, 2011, and 2013, due to a lack of cash flow for his business.3 
Applicant noted that he had an installment agreement with the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) and had been making regular payments on his tax debt since 2009. The IRS 
compiled future years’ tax debts into that agreement. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 49.) On October 
28, 2016, Applicant took a debt consolidation loan from a credit union and paid off his 
IRS debt in full.4 He provided documentation from the IRS that shows his “account is 
paid in full at this time.” Applicant’s delinquent tax debts identified in SOR 
subparagraphs 1.b through 1.f are resolved. (AE A; Tr. 42-49, 78, 97-104.) 
 
 Applicant also disclosed on his e-QIP that he failed to file his tax year 2012 and 
2013 Federal and state income tax returns in a timely manner. Applicant suffered a 
                                                          
2 He previously worked as a contractor for the same defense contractor, beginning September 2015. (AE 
G; Tr. 109-111.) 
3 Applicant’s state income taxes from the same time period are paid and was not alleged as delinquent. 
(Answer; GE 2.) 
4 Applicant testified that he is current on his debt consolidation loan. (Tr. 125) 
 
3 
 
business downturn in approximately 2012. He also lost some paperwork, partially as a 
result of a separation with his fiancée and subsequent move. He testified that his 
Certified Public Accountant (CPA), had requested extensions to file his Federal and 
state income tax returns in 2012 and 2013. He thought his CPA had filed those returns 
prior to the extensions lapsing, but the CPA had not because he lacked the proper 
documentation from Applicant. Applicant contacted the IRS in approximately February 
2015, when completing his e-QIP, to ascertain the exact amounts due to the IRS and 
properly disclose it on his e-QIP. At that time, he learned that his 2012 and 2013 
Federal and state income tax returns were still outstanding. When Applicant learned 
that they were outstanding, he contacted his CPA and filed the outstanding state and 
Federal returns in February 2015, as documented in IRS and state tax transcripts. His 
2014 Federal and state income tax returns were filed in a timely manner, after receiving 
a valid extension from both the Federal and state governments. He testified that all tax 
returns since then have been filed as required by law. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 39-45, 108-125.) 
He had been in “constant communication with the IRS making sure [he] wasn’t ignoring 
them, even before applying for a clearance. [He] never intended to walk away from any 
tax obligations.” (Tr. 45.) 
 
 Applicant attended and completed a Peace University personal financial 
management course. (AE I.) In that course, he learned “how to create a better budget 
and do things the right way essentially.” (Tr. 61.)  
 
 Applicant has successfully completed numerous courses relating to his specialty 
and received certificates documenting those achievements. (AE B; AE C; AE D.) He has 
participated as a volunteer mentor for youth in a competition. (AE E; Tr. 81-82.) His 
2016 performance evaluation reflects he is a valued employee. (AE F; Tr. 84-87.) His 
managers indicate that Applicant has proven to be a dependable, dedicated and 
trustworthy team member. (AE G; AE H.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant had a history of failing to file and pay his Federal income taxes since 
2008. He could not afford to satisfy those Federal tax debts in full. He also failed to file 
his 2012 and 2013 state and Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, as required 
by law. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling from a credible source, Peace University. 
He has incorporated the lessons he learned in that course. AG ¶ 20(c) provides some 
mitigation.  
 
Additionally, he made a responsible, good-faith effort to repay his delinquent 
Federal taxes beginning in 2009 when he first set up installment payments. His 
subsequent years’ tax debts were added to that plan. He made regular payments to that 
plan, as required, until he was able to receive a debt consolidation loan and fully resolve 
his IRS debt. He is current with his payments on the debt consolidation loan. Further, he 
filed his delinquent Federal tax returns for 2012 and 2013, when he learned they were 
outstanding. While his inattention to this legal duty to file for two years was irresponsible 
and showed poor judgment, he addressed it in a mature and responsible manner once 
he learned from the IRS that those returns had not been filed. As a general rule, 
 
6 
 
"[f]ailure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with 
well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules 
and systems is essential for protecting classified information." (ISCR Case No. 14-
05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016).) Filing tax returns concomitantly with the filing of 
an e-QIP is suspect. However, in this case, Applicant contacted the IRS while 
completing his e-QIP in order to provide full and complete answers on the e-QIP about 
his debts, and learned of the delinquent filings, which he disclosed. He immediately 
acted upon that knowledge, hired a CPA, and filed the delinquent returns to the 
satisfaction of the IRS. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) provide mitigation.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is respected by his managers that wrote letters on his behalf. He 
performs well at his job. He fell behind on paying his Federal income tax when he 
started a business, but he immediately made payment arrangements with the IRS. He 
has now paid off his Federal tax debt through a consolidation loan. He is employed by a 
government contractor and no longer runs a business. He has matured, is now a parent, 
and is an active member of his community. He has taken financial management classes 
from a reputable source. There is little likelihood Applicant will allow similar incidents to 
occur in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
