 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 16-00574 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges two bankruptcies, a delinquent 
mortgage, delinquent federal taxes, and two delinquent medical debts. The tax debt was 
paid, and debts resolved through the bankruptcies were caused by circumstances beyond 
her control. She did not provide sufficient evidence of resolution of her financial issues. 
Applicant failed to disclose three delinquent debts on her September 17, 2015 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application 
(SCA). Financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 17, 2015, Applicant completed and signed her SCA. (Item 3) On 
May 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines. 
 
On June 13, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she did not 
request a hearing. (Item 2) On July 14, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM). On July 25, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, and she did 
not respond to the FORM. On May 22, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The case file 
consists of seven exhibits. (Items 1-7) Applicant did not object to any of the Government 
exhibits, and they are admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, 
and 2.b. (Item 2) She also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 52 years old, and she has been employed in shipping and receiving 
since August 2013.3 She was unemployed from July 2010 to August 2013. She was 
employed in shipping and receiving from September 2005 to July 2010. She has never 
served in the military. She married in 1980, and she divorced in 2000. Since 2011, she 
has been cohabiting. Her children were born in 1981, 1984, and 1990. She did not 
disclose any education or college credits in the previous 10 years. There is no evidence 
of security violations or use of illegal drugs. 
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s September 
17, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Item 3)  
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2009, when her cohabitant was unable to 
work. (Item 7) Her financial problems worsened when she became unemployed in 2010. 
(Item 7) Her cohabitant was unable to work, and he was seeking social security disability. 
(Item 7)  
 
Applicant’s October 10, 2015 credit report, 2011 bankruptcy filing, October 27, 
2015 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI), and SOR 
response are the basis for the allegations in the SOR. (Items 2, 4-7) The status of the six 
SOR allegations is as follows: ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f allege her nonpriority unsecured debts were 
discharged in September 1998 and May 2011 under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code; 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege two delinquent medical debts for $403 and $6,916; and ¶ 1.d alleges 
a mortgage account delinquent more than 120 days in the amount of $48,261 with a total 
loan balance of $152,390. She has not made any of her mortgage payments for about 
two years; and SOR ¶ 1.e alleges delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2009 for $1,447. 
(Item 2, 3-7) Her $1,447 in delinquent taxes for tax year 2009 were listed as an unsecured 
priority debt on her 2011 bankruptcy Schedule E. (Item 5) In her SOR response, she said 
her former spouse paid this tax debt, and she has received a tax refund of about $1,000. 
(Item 2)   
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was crucial for her to 
provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts on the SOR. 
(FORM at 2-3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. She is credited with receipt of 
financial counseling, which is required during the bankruptcy process. The record lacks 
corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes 
for her financial problems and other mitigating information. The FORM informed Applicant 
that she had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your 
case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the 
evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 2-3) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On her September 17, 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed that her debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in 2011. (Item 3) Her SCA asked 
about delinquent federal income taxes and about debts in collection or delinquent over 
120 days. (Item 3) SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that she failed to disclose the delinquent taxes in 
SOR ¶ 1.e on this SCA. SOR ¶ 2.b alleges she failed to disclose the delinquent debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e on this SCA. 
 
Applicant’s October 27, 2015 OPM PSI said the investigator confronted Applicant 
about the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e. (Item 7) She said she did not 
 
4 
                                         
 
understand that they were supposed to be disclosed on her SCA. In her SCA response, 
she denied SOR ¶ 2.a, and she admitted SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations;” and “(f) . . . failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
 
6 
                                         
 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)).  
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant refuted the $1,447 tax debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.e, and she is credited with mitigating this debt. Applicant’s bankruptcies in 
1998 and 2011 were caused by her unemployment, and security concerns arising from 
her bankruptcies are mitigated. Her cohabitant has had medical problems, and he was 
unable to work. Applicant has had medical problems. Unemployment and medical 
problems are circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected her finances. 
 
Applicant’s October 10, 2015 credit report, OPM PSI, and SOR response establish 
that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d are delinquent. Applicant did not provide enough 
details with documentary corroboration about what she did to address these three SOR 
debts. She did not provide documentation relating to any of these three SOR debts such 
as: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, 
or a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the creditors; 
(2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;6 (3) 
credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe she was responsible for the debts 
and why she held such a belief; (4) evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve these 
debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
                                            
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
8 
                                         
 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. There is insufficient assurance 
that her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the 
future. Under all the circumstances, she failed to establish that financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”7 In her SOR response, 
Applicant denied that she failed to disclose her delinquent tax debt for tax year 2009 for 
$1,447 on her September 17, 2015 SCA because she believed her husband had paid it.  
She may not have understood her responsibility to disclose tax debts that were historically 
delinquent in the past seven years. The allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a is refuted. 
 
In her SOR response, Applicant admitted that she failed to disclose the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d on her September 17, 2015 SCA. SOR ¶ 2.b and AG ¶ 16(a) 
are established. 
 
  
                                            
7 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
9 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
   
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her delinquent mortgage and two 
delinquent medical debts on her September 17, 2015 SCA. This falsification by 
intentionally failing to disclose her current financial problems were serious, improper, and 
raised a security concern. No mitigating conditions apply. Personal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
10 
                                         
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old, and she has been employed in shipping and receiving 
since August 2013. She was unemployed from July 2010 to August 2013. She was 
employed in shipping and receiving from September 2005 to July 2010. There is no 
evidence of security violations or use of illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary 
evidence of payments and established payment plans for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1.d. She did not provide a detailed plan about how she intended to resolve these 
three delinquent SOR debts. More documented information about inability to pay debts, 
financial history, or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns.  
 
Applicant admitted that she made a false statement on her September 17, 2015 
SCA when she denied that she had debts over 120 days delinquent. She knew she had 
two delinquent medical debts and her mortgage was delinquent for more than two years.  
Her falsification in a security context raises a serious security concern. The protection of 
national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes security, even 
when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant cannot be trusted to 
disclose potentially derogatory information. She did not establish her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial 
consideration and personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time.  
 
  
 
11 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   For Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
