 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-00419 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 9, 2015. On 
June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 15, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 10, 2016. On August 11, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 
through 5. He was given an opportunity to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation to the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on August 22, 2016, and did not respond. Item 1 
 
2 
 
contains the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 5 are admitted into evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on June 1, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. 
Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 57, divorced his wife of 22 years in 2000. They have two adult 
sons. Since approximately 2012, he has been cohabiting with his girlfriend of about 12 
years. Applicant did not obtain a high school diploma or G.E.D. He has worked full time 
as a model builder for the same defense contractor since 1981. He was granted a 
secret clearance in 1984. The record is silent as to whether he currently maintains a 
security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts totaling $16,207. Applicant admitted seven 
debts totaling $10,260. He denied, without explanation, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
(collection account/$83), 1.f (collection account/$1,034), 1.i (past-due mortgage 
account/$4,649 with a total balance of $91,874), 1.k (collection account/$98), and 1.l 
(collection account/$83). The credit reports establish each of the denied debts.4 
 
In his SOR answer, without any specific details, Applicant attributed his 
delinquent debts to an “extremely difficult separation” in 2011 that “threw [his] life as 
well as [his] financial stability off track.” He claimed that he was “actively pursuing 
making arrangements” with his “legitimate” creditors to satisfy his delinquent debts.  
 
During his 2015 interview, Applicant explained that he granted his girlfriend 
access to his financial accounts so that she could pay his bills while he travelled for 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 1), his SCA (Item 2), and the summary of his November 2015 subject 
interview (Item 3). Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection 
to Item 3, I will consider only those facts in Item 3 that are not adverse to Applicant, unless they are 
contained in other evidence or based upon his admissions in the SOR answer. 
 
4 GE 4 and 5. I considered that several debts reference the same creditor in amounts that are similar 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.k, and 1.l).  
 
3 
 
work. His work travel accounted for 50% of his time. Instead of paying his bills, 
Applicant claimed that his girlfriend used his money to start a business that was 
ultimately unsuccessful. Applicant claimed not to have discovered that the mortgage 
loan for his primary residence was pending foreclosure (SOR ¶ 1.i) until it was “too late.”  
Applicant claimed not only that he did not see any late notices or foreclosure warnings, 
but that he “rarely” saw any of his bills and “did not ask about them.” Applicant claimed, 
without providing any corroborating documentation, that the mortgage loan was 
foreclosed upon on an unspecified date and that he had not received any notification of 
a deficiency balance.  
 
After the foreclosure, Applicant separated from his girlfriend “for a while” and 
granted his brother and one of his sons access to his financial accounts so that they 
could pay his bills while he travelled for work. Applicant claimed, without providing 
corroborating documentation or any specific details, that his brother used Applicant’s 
credit cards to make unauthorized purchases, and that his brother and son did not pay 
the bills as expected. During his 2015 interview, Applicant was confronted with most of 
the debts alleged in the SOR. He promised to pay “as soon as possible” any delinquent 
debts known to him and those unknown to him for which he determined he was 
responsible after researching them. 
 
 Although it was not alleged in the SOR, Applicant answered “no” to each 
financial-related question on his SCA, thereby failing to disclose any of the SOR or 
other delinquent debts that he knew about at the time that he completed it.5 During his 
2015 interview, he claimed that the computer would not allow him to input incomplete 
information about the foreclosure and other known debts, that he was in a rush to 
complete his SCA, and that he knew he would be interviewed about his debts. He 
voluntarily reported his known debts during that interview. 
 
The record is silent as to whether Applicant has sought out or received any credit 
counseling. Attached to his SOR answer were three references from friends, who are 
also co-workers, commending Applicant’s character and work performance. None of 
those references indicated knowledge of the state of Applicant’s financial affairs. 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel specifically highlighted that Applicant had not 
provided certain documentation to establish mitigation and advised of the opportunity 
that he had to do so in his response to the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. 
  
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”6 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
                                                          
5 I will consider this only for the purposes of evaluating mitigation and whole person. 
 
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
information.”7 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”8 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”9 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.10 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”11 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.12 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
                                                          
7 Egan at 527. 
 
8 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
9 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
5 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.13 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.14 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”15 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debt) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR have not been mitigated by any of the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
                                                          
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain 
unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s debts were not caused by 
circumstances largely beyond his control. However, even if they were so deemed, he 
has not acted responsibly to address the resulting debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant did not receive financial 
counseling. Because he did not respond to the FORM, the record is silent as to what, if 
any, progress he made in resolving his delinquent debts. The record is also silent as to 
his current ability to repay delinquent debts and the reasons that they have persisted 
after he promised to address them back in 2015. I cannot conclude that his financial 
problems are under control at this time. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his failure to pay delinquent debts. I am also troubled by Applicant’s 
failure to report the foreclosure and other known debts on his SCA. Applicant was first 
granted a security clearance in 1984 and, because he still works in the same position 
for the same defense contractor, it is reasonable to assume that he has held one for all 
or part of the time since then. Thus, he should have known that he had a duty to report 
his known debts to the Government on his SCA regardless of whether he might later 
have an opportunity to discuss them during an interview. His failure to do so further calls 
into question his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Accordingly, Applicant 
has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
