 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00300 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017 for all 
decisions after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the 
 
2 
 
SOR. Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my 
decision in this case.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2016 and requested a hearing. The case 
was assigned to me on April 10, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 3, 2017, scheduling the hearing for June 1, 
2017, with the agreement of both parties.2 The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. 
I held the record open until June 16, 2017, to enable Applicant to submit additional 
information. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 12, 2017.  
 
On June 7, 2017, Applicant retained legal counsel. Counsel sought additional 
time to submit documentation, and also to re-open the hearing. On June 8, 2017, 
Department Counsel filed a response in which he objected to renewing the hearing for 
lack of good cause shown. He did not object to providing Applicant additional time to 
submit documents.3 I held the record open until July 14, 2017, and deferred my ruling 
on the need for a new hearing until I had reviewed Applicant’s new documents.4  
 
On July 12, 2017, Applicant submitted AE B through AE H, along with a 
supporting brief. AE B through AE H are admitted without objection. I informed the 
parties on July 20, 2017 that the record was closed.5 
   
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, with explanations.  
His admissions and other comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He was married between 1981 and 1996, and also 
between 1998 and 2009. He remarried in 2011. He has two grown children from his first 
marriage. After high school, he served honorably for 12 years in the Marine Corps 
(1980-92), holding a top secret clearance. Since 2004, Applicant has worked as an 
                                                          
1 I provided Applicant a copy of  the new AGs at the start of the hearing, (Tr. 11-14), and to his counsel 
after he entered appearance. (HE IV). 
 
2 The pre-hearing e-mail correspondence between myself and the parties concerning jurisdiction, 
scheduling and documents for the hearing is in the record and marked as Hearing Exhibit  I (HE I); and 
the government’s discovery letter is marked as HE II.  
 
3 HE III. 
 
4 HE IV.  
 
5 HE V.  
 
 
3 
 
engineer in the defense industry, with a secret clearance. (Tr. 9, 10, 22-23, 26-27; GE 1, 
AE G, AE H).   
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in March 2015. He 
used a current credit report as a reference in answering financial questions. He 
disclosed several delinquent debts, including most of the debts in the SOR. (Tr. 37-38, 
GE 1)  
 
The five debts alleged in the SOR total about $13,951. All the debts in the SOR 
are located on Applicant’s credit reports from July 2016 and April 2015 (GE 2, GE 3).  
For SOR ¶ 1.b – 1.e, Applicant stated, in part, “I admit that I properly and correctly 
disclosed this [debt] on my SF-86 . . .”6 
 
Applicant testified that his second wife had mental health issues and was a 
spendthrift. In late November 2009, he returned from a business trip to find her gone 
and the house stripped of furniture. He testified that he later heard from her father that 
she had filed for bankruptcy. He also hired a lawyer to contest many of her debts. (Tr. 
33-34, 48-52, 62)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($6,829) and 1.c ($5,970) are credit card debts, both reported to the 
same collection agency. The accounts became delinquent in 2009-2010, around the 
time, or after, Applicant’s marriage ended.7 Applicant reported the debts on his SCA 
because they were on his credit report, but also believed they were old accounts 
belonging to his second wife. He believed he had settled ¶ 1.c for $2,500 several years 
ago. Applicant’s hearing testimony was consistent with what he reported on his SCA. 
(Tr. 35-37, 39, GE 1). When he received the SOR, he contacted the collection agency.  
He received a settlement offer but chose not to pursue it, since he believed he was not 
responsible for the debts. (Tr. 43)    
 
Despite his belief that the accounts were his ex-wife’s debts, they are listed on 
his credit bureau report as “individual” accounts.8 He initially testified that this was an 
accounting error, but later acknowledged he would have to pay the accounts if they 
were listed as his. (Tr. 51, 59) The original creditor for ¶ 1.b is a bank where Applicant 
still has an account, and an ATM/debit card that he uses. (Tr. 61) He denied having an 
account with the original creditor bank for SOR ¶ 1.c. (Tr. 63) Applicant paid both SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c after the hearing. (AE B, C, D).9 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($251) and 1.e ($186) are collection debts to the same cable 
company. Applicant admitted the debts in his answer, though he thought one might be a 
                                                          
6 Answer.  
 
7 GE 2 at 2, GE 3 at 10.  
 
8 GE 3 at 10. 
 
9 Applicant settled SOR ¶ 1.b for $4,097 and settled SOR ¶ 1.c for $3,582. (AE B, C, D). 
 
 
4 
 
duplicate.10 He testified that the debts concerned a router or modem that he thought he 
returned but was not properly credited for. He believes he paid the debts. He testified he 
has not had an account with this company since 2011. (Tr. 28-31, 56, 59) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d ($715) is a past-due medical bill. Applicant disclosed the bill on his 
SCA. He went to the emergency room and the treating physician was not an “in-plan” 
doctor, so his insurance company refused to pay. Applicant challenged the bill through 
his insurance company. Having learned that the bill was on his credit report, he testified 
that he paid the bill last summer. (Tr. 31-33, 57-58; GE 3)   
 
In May 2017, Applicant accepted a new job in the defense industry. His salary 
increased from $147,000 to $172,000. He and his wife have a combined net monthly 
income of about $10,000. Applicant has not been through credit counseling. (Tr. 25, 66, 
71) Applicant and his wife own their home and are current on their $2,400 monthly 
mortgage. Other than the debts in the SOR, Applicant stated he had no other debts 
beyond a car payment. His monthly finances are stable and he lives within his means. 
(Tr. 69-71; AE E, AE F)  
 
Applicant provided three letters of recommendation. His references have all 
known him professionally for many years. They attest to his integrity, work ethic, 
dedication to excellence, and commitment. (AE A)     
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.11 As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12 
  
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.”  
 
                                                          
10 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are both listed separately on GE 2 and GE 3. The accounts were opened at 
different times. They do not appear to be duplicate accounts.  
 
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”).  
 
12 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR debts are listed on Applicant’s credit reports, and he admits them, 
albeit with qualifications. Applicant’s delinquent debts are sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant testified that he paid SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. The payments are 
undocumented, but the debts are also small, totaling only $1,152 combined. Each of the 
debts also arose from a reasonable, understandable circumstance. If in fact he has not 
paid them, he clearly has the means to do so. I resolve these debts for Applicant.  
 
 Applicant testified that he had a difficult second marriage that ended suddenly. 
Applicant steadfastly believed until the hearing that SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were old and 
were his ex-wife’s responsibility, so he did not have to pay them. His credit reports 
indicated otherwise, since the debts were listed as individual accounts on his credit 
reports. However, the debts arose around the time his second marriage ended. This 
was a circumstance beyond his control that impacted his finances. The first prong of AG 
¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c have now been paid, albeit after the hearing. The timing of 
the payments weighs against giving Applicant full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) or AG ¶ 
20(d). However, the debts were largely isolated and were several years old. His current 
finances are sound. He and his wife both make a good living and live with their means. 
Applicant is unlikely to find himself in financial difficulty again, and if he does, I believe 
he would act responsibly. His finances no longer cast doubt on his current judgment, 
trustworthiness and reliability. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I credit Applicant’s 12 years of 
honorable service in the U.S. Marine Corps, and his many years in the defense industry 
as a cleared employee. I also credit Applicant with candidly disclosing his debts on his 
SCA, since they appeared on his credit report, even if he believed the information was 
incorrect. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
