 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-03070 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant used marijuana infrequently from 1991 to August 2012. He has held a 
security clearance since 1995. He failed to disclose his marijuana use on his December 
14, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) Drug involvement security concerns are 
mitigated because his marijuana use is not recent; however, personal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On July 28, 2005, and December 14, 2015, Applicant completed and signed SCAs. 
(GE 1, 2) On November 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant a security clearance 
for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). (HE 2) 
  
On December 21, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and waived his right to 
a hearing. (HE 3) On January 31, 2017, Department Counsel requested a hearing. (Tr. 
10) On March 31, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 24, 2017, 
the case was assigned to me. On April 24, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for May 5, 2017. (HE 1) 
Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and place of his hearing. 
(Tr. 12-13) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Transcript (Tr.) 11, 16-18; GE 1-3) On May 15, 2017, DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 2.a, 
2.b, 2.c, and 2.d. (HE 3) He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. (HE 3) He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. (HE 3) Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 44 years old, and he has been employed as an avionics technician for 
the previous 22 years. (Tr. 6-7) In 1990, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) He has 
not attended college. (Tr. 6) In 1994, he received a certificate from a technical school. (Tr. 
21) He has never served in the military. (Tr. 6) In 1990, he married, and in 1997, he 
divorced. (Tr. 7) His daughter is 26 years old. (Tr. 7) He has held a security clearance for 
22 years, and there is no evidence of a security violation. (Tr. 8, 38)  
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant infrequently used marijuana from 1991 to 2012. (Tr. 18, 22, 24) He used 
marijuana two or three times a year. (Tr. 22) In 2001, the police arrested Applicant for 
possession of marijuana when the police found a marijuana cigarette in his cigarette pack. 
(Tr. 29) From 2001 to 2010, he used marijuana once in 2010. (Tr. 24) When he had his 
April 22, 2016 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI), 
he said his most recent marijuana use was a year or two before the interview. (Tr. 25) His 
company does not have unannounced drug tests. (Tr. 21) He denied that he intends to 
use marijuana in the future. (Tr. 27, 31) Some of his friends that he sees occasionally use 
marijuana. (Tr. 28) His close friends do not use marijuana. (Tr. 28) He denied that he 
purchased or distributed marijuana. (Tr. 31, 38) He has not used any other illegal drugs. 
(Tr. 31) He has not received drug counseling. (Tr. 34) He insisted that his most recent 
marijuana use was on his 40th birthday in August 2012. (Tr. 23-26, 30) He emphasized 
his marijuana use was infrequent, not recent, and it did not adversely affect his job 
performance or security. (Tr. 36)   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On his July 28, 2005 SCA, in response to the questions about whether he 
possessed or used marijuana in the last seven years and whether he ever used marijuana 
while holding a security clearance, Applicant disclosed his use of marijuana in September 
2001, his arrest and conviction for marijuana possession or possession of drug 
paraphernalia, and he indicated he “occasionally” used marijuana. (Tr. 32; GE 2; GE 3) 
On his December 14, 2015 SCA, Applicant denied that he possessed or used marijuana 
in the last seven years, and he denied that he ever used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. (Tr. 31; GE 1; GE 3)  
 
 At the time he completed his SCAs, Applicant did not consider his marijuana use 
to be to the extent where disclosure was required. (Tr. 32) He did not believe he had “a 
drug habit,” and he did not consider himself to be a drug user. (Tr. 33) He did not want to 
answer additional or follow-up questions about his drug use that would result if he opened 
the door by disclosing marijuana use. (Tr. 33) It was “expediency” or out of convenience 
for him not to disclose the frequency of his marijuana use. (Tr. 34) He acknowledged that 
he should have disclosed his marijuana use. (Tr. 32-34)     
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
 
4 
                                         
 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 lists three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
Applicant’s SOR response, OPM PSI, and hearing record establish Applicant 
possessed and used marijuana3 while holding a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), 
and 25(f) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
                                            
 3 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 
21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement 
Administration listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales 
v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6 
                                         
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence 
of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.”4 
                                            
4 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, 
and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated: 
 
7 
                                         
 
Applicant’s infrequently used marijuana from 1991 to August 2012. He held a 
security clearance from 1992 to present. He did not receive drug counseling, and he 
continues to infrequently associate with marijuana users. His marijuana possession and 
use are not recent, and he assures he will not use marijuana in the future. Drug 
involvement security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”5 Applicant provided 
                                            
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage of 
three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel the 
administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of law, 
the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply that 
mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR Case 
No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a rational 
basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at alcohol 
rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004) (reversing an unfavorable security 
clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use was not mitigated after 
the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse). In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the administrative judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s 
security clearance after considering the recency analysis of an administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
5 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
 
8 
                                         
 
enough information on his July 28, 2005 SCA about his involvement with marijuana, 
including his conviction for possession of marijuana or possession of drug paraphernalia 
and his occasional marijuana use to put the government on notice of his marijuana 
involvement. The allegation in SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d that he falsified his July 28, 2005 SCA 
is refuted because he did not intentionally mislead the Government. However, he did not 
provide accurate information about his history of marijuana possession and use on his 
December 14, 2015 SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
                                            
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
                                         
 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
   
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. He receives some credit under AG ¶ 
17(a) because he disclosed his marijuana use during his April 22, 2016 OPM PSI; 
however, it was more than four months after his December 14, 2015 SCA was signed 
which is not a prompt correction of his false statements on his SCA. His false statements 
on his December 14, 2015 SCA were deliberate. These falsifications by intentionally 
failing to disclose his marijuana possession and use are serious, improper, and raise a 
significant security concern. His statement that he believed he did not need to disclose 
his marijuana possession and use because it was not frequent or not significant is not 
credible. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines H and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old, and he has been employed as an avionics technician for 
the previous 22 years. In 1990, he graduated from high school. He has not attended 
college. In 1994, he received a certificate from a technical school. He has held a security 
clearance for 22 years, and there is no evidence of a security violation. His disclosure of 
his marijuana possession and use during his OPM PSI, his expression of regret, and the 
termination of his marijuana use are important factors of mitigation.   
  
Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions from 1991 to August 2012. He has 
held a security clearance since 1995. He intentionally failed to disclose his marijuana 
possession and use on his December 14, 2015 SCA.  
 
 
10 
                                         
 
Applicant’s December 14, 2015 falsification of his SCA was in a security context. 
This conduct raises a serious security concern. The protection of national security relies 
on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes security, even when that disclosure 
might damage the applicant’s career or cause embarrassment. Applicant cannot be 
trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information. He did not establish his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Drug 
involvement security concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
