 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01833 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), G (Alcohol Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 4, 2015. On 
November 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F, G, and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 3, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
31, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on March 2, 2017. On March 3, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for March 22, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified but did not present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any 
documentary evidence. I kept the record open until April 7, 2017, to enable him to 
submit documentary evidence, but he did not submit anything further. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on April 4, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old electronics technician employed by a defense 
contractor. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from December 1998 to 
September 2012 and received a general discharge under honorable conditions. He held 
a security clearance in the Navy and while employed by a defense contractor, but it was 
suspended when he received the SOR. (Tr. 8.)  
 
While on active duty, Appellant attended college part time and received an 
associate’s degree in June 2008. After his discharge from the Navy, he received a 
bachelor’s degree in November 2014. He married in August 1982 and divorced in 
November 2008. He married his current spouse in June 2011 and separated in 
December 2011. He has a 14-year-old son from his first marriage, for whom he pays 
child support of about $225 per month. His child-support payments are current. (Tr. 29.) 
He and his second wife have not divorced because they cannot afford it. (GX 7.) 
 
In June 2012, Applicant was arrested by civilian authorities for driving under the 
influence after he was involved in an accident. He had been drinking at a bar from 6:00 
p.m. to about 2:00 a.m. During a personal subject interview in November 2015, he told 
an investigator that he could not recall how much he drank, but he knew he was 
intoxicated. He failed the field sobriety tests and the breathalyzer reflected that his 
blood-alcohol concentration (BAC) was over the legal limit. He was convicted of driving 
while intoxicated (DWI) and sentenced to 90 days in jail (suspended). His driver’s 
license was restricted, and he was required to complete an alcohol-education program 
and install an interlock device in his car. (GX 2 at 9.) He also was required to attend 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, and he attended them twice a week for about a 
year. (Tr. 47.) In August 2012, he received nonjudicial punishment from his military 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The 
changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
commander for the same DWI, and he was reduced in rank from petty officer first class 
(E-6) to petty officer second class (E-5) and restricted to his ship for two weeks. (GX 1 
at 29; GX 2 at 7; GX 3.) As a result of being reduced in rank, he was precluded from 
continuing his Navy service under the “high year tenure” rules. (Tr. 58.) 
 
Applicant was unemployed from the date of his discharge from the Navy until 
December 2012. He worked seasonally for a professional tax preparer from December 
2012 to March 2013, was unemployed from March to September 2013, worked as a 
systems analyst from September 2013 to March 2014, was unemployed from March to 
December 2014, and worked for a professional tax preparer from December 2014 until 
he began his current job in March 2015. 
 
 Applicant testified that he abstained from alcohol from November 2012 until 
2014, when he resumed drinking to cope with depression. (Tr. 47.) On a date he could 
not recall, he was detained for public intoxication, held overnight in the “drunk tank” and 
then released. He testified that he was never charged or required to appear in court for 
this incident. (Tr. 54.)  
 
Applicant was charged with a second DWI in October 2015 after he struck a 
parked truck. (Tr. 48-49.) He testified that he had been drinking at a bar with a friend. 
He could not remember how much he drank, but it was “quite a bit.” He consumed 
enough alcohol to register a BAC over the legal limit at about 2:00 p.m. on the following 
day. (Tr. 49.) He was convicted in May 2016, and he was sentenced to 365 days in jail, 
with 355 days suspended and fined $500. He served ten days in jail. He was placed on 
unsupervised probation for thirty-six months and was still on probation at the time of the 
hearing. He was again required to attend an alcohol education course and participate in 
AA. He stopped attending AA meetings after about four months because of his busy 
work schedule.  
 
Applicant testified that he has totally abstained from alcohol since July 2016. (GX 
3; GX 4; Tr. 52-53.) He has never been diagnosed with alcohol dependence or alcohol 
abuse. (Tr. 60.) He testified that he stopped consuming alcohol because he was 
cautioned by medical authorities about the dangers of combining alcohol with the 
antidepressant and sleep medications he is taking. He admitted that he still finds himself 
wishing he could have a drink. He testified that he continues to suffer from depression, 
but he has not received any further therapy after he completed a four-month program in 
November 2016. (Tr. 61-62.) He submitted no documentation of his AA participation or 
his treatment for depression. 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in November 2015. He did 
not tell the investigator that he had been arrested for DWI in October and was awaiting 
trial. (GX 2 at 7.) He testified that the investigator told him he was only interested in 
events that occurred before August 2015. He admitted that the investigator asked him if 
he had been involved in any other DWI incidents and he answered “No” (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) from March 2015 and March 2016 
reflected the 12 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. (GX 5; GX 6.) The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: car loan past due for about $1,013 with a balance of about 
$19,031. This debt is included in the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: unsecured loan placed for collection of about $6,980. Applicant 
testified that he obtained this loan for legal fees, bail bonds, and related expenses due 
to his second wife’s multiple incidents with law enforcement officials, including a DWI 
arrest, multiple speeding tickets, and a traffic accident. (Tr. 26, 37.) While he was on 
active duty, the payments on the loans were deducted from his military pay, but the 
automatic payments stopped when he was discharged and he could not afford to 
continue making them. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: credit-card account charged off for $1,260. Applicant testified that 
he made one or two payments on this debt and then stopped because he could not 
afford any more payments.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: line of credit charged off for $1,145. At the hearing, Applicant 
speculated that this debt may have been for a credit card, but he was not sure. (Tr. 39.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.i, and 1.k: delinquent medical bills for $964, $1,367, and $209. 
Applicant testified that these debts were incurred for treatment of injuries to his knees 
and gastro-intestinal problems that began while he was on active duty. The debts were 
incurred at a time when he did not have medical insurance. He testified that he has 
taken no action to resolve them. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: overdraft on a checking account placed for collection of $469. 
Applicant testified that he was making monthly payments of $40 on this debt until he 
was discharged and could no longer afford the payments.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: car loan charged off for $22,478. This debt arose from the DWI 
incident in August 2012, in which Applicant wrecked his car and it was a total loss. (Tr. 
31.) He testified that he had documentation that the debt was a “write off,” but he did not 
submit it. However, his March 2016 CBR reflects that the debt was settled for less than 
full amount. (GX 6 at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: telecommunications bill charged off for $459. Applicant testified 
that this debt was incurred when the provider cut off service without notice and he was 
unable to contact a customer-service representation. He has made no attempt to pay 
this debt. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: cellphone bill placed for collection of $1,318. Applicant testified 
that he could not afford to pay the monthly bills for this service after he was discharged. 
He has taken no action to resolve it. (Tr. 41.) 
 
5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: telecommunications bill placed for collection of $146. Applicant 
testified that he is attempting to restore service with this provider and that he intended to 
pay the past-due amount and the next monthly payment. He provided no documentary 
evidence that this debt is resolved. (Tr. 41.) 
 
 Applicant currently earns about $47,500 per year, and he has been receiving 
$976 per month in disability compensation since March 2015. (Tr. 28, 44.) He estimates 
that he has a monthly net remainder of about $1,000 after paying his bills and living 
expenses.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he had hired a debt-resolution company to 
assist him April 2015, and he is paying the company $89 per month. He testified that the 
company is challenging the validity of some of his debts. He did not know how much of 
the $89 was applied to paying his debts. (Tr. 26, 43.) His reaction to his financial 
problems has been passive, and he does not have a good grasp of his financial 
situation. He testified that he has taken no action to resolve any of his delinquent debts 
because he is relying on the debt-resolution company to do so. (Tr. 45.) Even though he 
was given additional time after the hearing to provide documentation showing the status 
of the debts being handled by the debt-resolution company, he provided nothing. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
6 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling about $37,000. The security 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
7 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The evidence reflects that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g are 
duplicates. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same 
guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See 
ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). 
Accordingly, I have resolved SOR ¶ 1.a in Applicant’s favor.  
  
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following 
mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s marital breakup, his wife’s criminal 
conduct, and his medical expenses for knee injuries and gastro-intestinal problems 
were conditions beyond his control. However, his periods of unemployment were the 
product of his misconduct that led to his premature discharge from the Navy. Except for 
the delinquent auto loan alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, he has made little effort to 
resolve his other debts. His debt-management company appears to be focused on 
challenging the validity of debts reflected in his CBR rather than negotiating settlement 
 
8 
 
of the debts. He did not begin working with the debt-management company until April 
2015. At the hearing, he was unfamiliar with the details of several debts and unaware of 
the steps taken by the debt-management company to resolve them. 
 
 AG ¶ 19(c) is not established. Applicant’s debt-management company is not 
providing the financial counseling contemplated by this mitigating condition. 
 
 AG ¶ 19(d) is established for the auto loan alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g, but not 
for the other debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant submitted no evidence of personal 
efforts or efforts by the debt management company on his behalf to resolve any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges two DWI incidents in October 2015 and June 2012 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
 Applicant’s two DWI incidents establish AG ¶ 22(a). The evidence also 
establishes binge consumption within the meaning of AG ¶ 22(c) on both occasions. 
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines “binge drinking” as “a 
pattern of drinking that brings a person’s BAC to 0.08 percent or above,” which typically 
occurs when a man has five or more drinks or a woman has four or more drinks within a 
two-hour period. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fact Sheets – Binge 
Drinking, www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-drinking.htm. Even though there is no 
specific evidence of the amount of alcohol Applicant consumed, it was sufficient to 
produce a BAC over the legal limit in both instances.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does 
 
9 
 
not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
 AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. At the time of the hearing, Applicant had abstained 
from alcohol for less than a year. He stopped attending AA meetings after about four 
months. He admitted that he still has the desire to drink alcohol. His alcohol 
consumption was frequent and did not occur under unusual circumstances.  
 
 AG ¶ 23(b) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his excessive 
alcohol consumption, but he produced no evidence of treatment for alcohol abuse. He 
attributed his drinking to depression. He admitted that he still suffers from depression, 
but he provided no evidence of his diagnosis and treatment for depression.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the two DWI incidents under this guideline (SOR ¶ 3.a) 
and alleges that Applicant falsified material facts during the PSI by failing to disclose his 
arrest for DWI in October 2015. The security concern under this guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 Applicant admitted that he intentionally did not disclose the October 2015 DWI 
arrest in response to the investigator’s question whether he had been involved in any 
other DWI incidents. His intentionally false answer establishes the disqualifying 
condition in AG ¶ 16(b): 
 
[D]eliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
 
10 
 
 Applicant’s two DWI incidents establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes . . . engaging in activities which, if known, could affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant made no effort correct his false 
statement in the PSI until he was confronted with the SOR and asked about false 
answer at the hearing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Intentionally false statements to an investigator are 
not “minor,” because they undermine the integrity of the security clearance process. 
Applicant’s false statement was recent because it pertains to the current ongoing 
security clearance process. His excessive alcohol consumption was recent, because he 
did not stop drinking until less than a year ago. None of the acts alleged in the SOR 
occurred under unusual circumstances. 
 
 
11 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his excessive 
alcohol consumption and admitted his falsification, but insufficient time has passed to 
establish that recurrence is unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established for the alcohol-related conduct, because Applicant is 
currently abstaining from alcohol. It is established for the falsification, because Applicant 
admitted the full extent of his alcohol problems during an open hearing.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, G, and E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not carried his burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts, 
alcohol consumption, and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
