 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00538 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, drug involvement. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the old AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AGs.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 27, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-3 (Item 1 included pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on August 
11, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not file any objections nor submit any 
additional evidence. Items 2-3 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on July 3, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted the allegation in the SOR. I adopt this 
admission as a finding of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He married in 2008 and has two children, ages five and 
three. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since June 2002. 
He has a master’s degree.2   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant purchased and used marijuana, with varying 
frequency, from approximately 1995 to approximately July 2015. 
  
 Applicant began using marijuana when he was 16 years old. He began 
purchasing marijuana at the same time and bought about an eighth of an ounce about 
every two months. He purchased it for personal use only. He smoked marijuana four to 
five times per week for about three to four months and then he would scale down for 
three to four months with minimal use or no use at all. He would smoke marijuana in 
cigarette form or by using a water pipe (bong). His estimated times of use is over 100. 
He sometimes provided marijuana to others who were with him. He smoked marijuana 
at his home, in social gatherings with friends, and at parties. He used marijuana for 
recreational use only to relax from stress. He has not received any drug counseling or 
treatment, and he has not been diagnosed with any addictive behavior. He claims to 
have stopped purchasing marijuana in May 2015, and using it in July 2015. He claims 
the reason he stopped was because he embarked on a new position at work and 
because he has a new outlook on life due to his family. He remains in contact with at 
least two friends who continue to use marijuana. He stated his intent is not to purchase 
or use marijuana in the future.3 
 
 Applicant did not produce any good character evidence. Since he submitted this 
case for an administrative determination, I was not able to judge his credibility.  
 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: “The 
illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription and non-
prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or mental 
impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 
U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above.” 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable in this case include: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant used and purchased marijuana on multiple occasions between 1995 
and 2015. I further find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
potentially apply in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
 involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
 involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
 eligibility. 
 
 Applicant’s use and purchase of marijuana was frequent and given his long-term 
pattern of use, his claimed abstinence beginning in 2015, is not sufficiently attenuated to 
be considered remote. He also claims that he stopped using in 2015 because of his 
family, yet he has been married since 2008 and his children were born before his 
claimed abstention from marijuana in 2015. He remains in contact with two friends who 
continue to use marijuana. He did not provide a signed statement of intent abstaining 
from all future illegal drug use, which acknowledged any future misuse would be 
grounds for revocation of his security clearance. Applicant’s claimed abstention is 
insufficient to convince me that recurrence is unlikely. His frequency of past use casts 
doubt upon his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 
26(b) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that he purchased and 
used marijuana on numerous occasions over a twenty year period. I also considered 
that he used marijuana after becoming a husband and a father.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement.  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
