 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00879 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, the AGs were updated and the AGs effective September 1, 2006 were cancelled.  
This decision will be decided based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were 
to consider this case under the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the 
same outcome.  
  
 On July 25, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 12, 
2016. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 2, 2017. It 
was transferred to me on May 22, 2017. On May 26, 2017, a Notice of Hearing was 
issued, scheduling the hearing for June 14, 2017.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
During the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as 
 
2 
 
 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4.  Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered 
eight exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 – 8. Applicant’s 
attachments to his Answer to the SOR were admitted as AE 9. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on June 22, 2017. The record was held open until June 28, 2017, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant was granted an extension to submit 
documents and he timely submitted a document which is admitted as AE 10. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 
April 2014. He has a high school diploma and some college credit. He served on active 
duty in the United States Navy from 1983 – 2003. He retired as a Chief Petty Officer 
with an honorable discharge. He is divorced and has four adult children. He is engaged 
to his live-in companion who is citizen of Canada, but a permanent resident of the 
United States.  (Tr. 25-26, 29-30, 32-33; Gov 1; Answer to SOR)   
 
After Applicant retired from active duty, he worked for Contractor A from 
February 2005 to 2010. He earned approximately $92,000 annually plus between 
$10,000 to $15,000 overtime. He left his position with Contractor A for a position with  
Contractor B.  Between February 2010 to July 2010, he took time off to visit his children 
before beginning his job with Contractor B. Applicant’s annual salary with Contractor B 
was $95,000.  In 2013, Applicant was terminated from his position with Contractor B 
because he failed to timely update his security clearance application and he did not 
disclose his fiance’s Canadian citizenship to his employer. (Tr. 26-31) 
 
Between April 2013 and May 2014, Applicant was unemployed or 
underemployed. During part of the year, he worked a minimum wage job and he worked 
for an insurance company, but his expenses were more than his earnings. In April 2014, 
he began his employment with his current company. He submitted a security clearance 
application on June 3, 2014. (Tr. 32, Gov 1)  
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he had the 
following delinquent debts: a mortgage payment that was past due in the amount of 
$3,315 with a total balance of $292,492. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 3 at 4)  a 
delinquent credit card account that was charged off in the amount of $6,779. (SOR ¶ 
1.b: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 5); a $3,830 collection account owed to a bank (SOR ¶ 1.c: 
Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 5); a $1,244 delinquent credit card account that was charged off 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 6); and a $664 credit union account that was charged 
off (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 2). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $342 cell phone account that was 
placed for collection; (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 14); a $250 speeding ticket that 
 
3 
 
 
was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 5); and a wage garnishment 
in July 2015 owed for state taxes (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 4).  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant states that his period of unemployment in 
2013 to 2014, adversely affected his finances. He went from earning $120,000 annually 
to living on his military retirement of $900 a month. He was responsible for two 
mortgages, his home and a rental property. He had to purchase a new heating and air 
conditioner for his house during this period which cost $6,379. He has worked with 
debtors to pay what he could. He worked with his mortgage company to accomplish 
loan modifications on both of his mortgages and now both mortgages are current. It has 
taken him two years to break even on his debts. (Answer to SOR: AE 7)   
 
The status of the SOR debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  Past due mortgage in the amount of $3,315, with a balance of 
$292,492:  Applicant’s mortgagor agreed to a loan modification. Applicant is now current 
on his mortgage payments. (Tr. 37; AE 2; AE 5; AE 6; AE 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b:  $6,779 charged off credit card account: Applicant entered into a 
payment agreement. He agreed to pay $75 per month beginning in July 2016. He has 
set up an allotment to pay this amount automatically from his pay. (Tr. 37; AE 3; AE 9 at 
2-3; Answer to SOR).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c:  $3,930 account with a bank that was placed for collection: Applicant 
settled and paid this debt on November 3, 2016. (Tr. 39; AE 4; AE 9 at 4)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $1,244 charged off credit card account: Applicant paid this debt on 
July 11, 2016. (Tr. 39; AE 9 at 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e:  $664 charged off debt owed to a credit union: Applicant states this 
related to a truck he returned.  He claims this debt was paid in full. He entered into a 
repayment agreement on July 22, 2016, to pay $100 a month towards this debt.  (Tr. 40; 
AE 9 at 6-7)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $342 telephone bill placed for collection:  Applicant paid this bill on 
July 11, 2016. (Tr. 42; AE 9 at 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g:  $250 speeding ticket placed for collection:  Applicant paid this debt 
on July 11, 2016. (Tr. 43-44; AE 9 at 9)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h:  $3,344.97 wage garnishment for delinquent state income tax debt: 
Applicant set up a monthly payment with the state. When he started earning more 
money, he paid off the tax debt. (Item 10)  
 
Applicant is not aware of any other delinquent debts, to include taxes. He is up-
to-date on his debts. (Tr. 45-48)       
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant encountered financial problems after he became unemployed in 2013. 
He struggled to pay his mortgages and his debts. He incurred eight delinquent debts, an 
approximate total of $19,768.97.  The debts include a $3,344 delinquent state tax debt.  
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
 
6 
 
 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) apply because Applicant’s debts were the result of a 
period of unemployment. There is no indication Applicant encountered financial 
problems prior to this time period.  He is working hard to resolve the delinquent debts 
incurred during his period of unemployment and is acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant’s past financial issues do not cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He provided proof that he resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1,g, and 1.h.  He entered into repayment agreements with the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e.  As soon as he was financially able, he put forth a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
AG & 20(g) applies because Applicant resolved his state tax debt. He initially 
began making payments and eventually paid the full balance.  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service and his employment as a defense contractor. I considered that he has 
worked on resolving these debts for several years. His year of unemployment between 
2013 to 2014 created considerable financial problems. Upon gaining employment and 
after taking some time to get on a more stable financial footing, Applicant began to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. He resolved most of the debts and is making payment 
plans towards his remaining debts. Applicant’s financial situation has improved and he 
is now able to meet his financial obligations. Security concerns under financial 
considerations are mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:    For Applicant 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
