 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00718 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 13, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 6, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for June 13, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 8, which were admitted 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and called her fiancé as a 
witness. Applicant presented two packets of documents, which I marked Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AppXs) A and B and admitted into the record without objection. The record 
was left open until June 30th, for receipt of additional documentation. Applicant 
submitted a post-hearing closing statement on June 19, 2017. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (TR) on June 21, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.k., and 1.l. She 
denied SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.c., and 1.e.~1.j. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a fifty-nine-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at 
pages 5 and 12.) She has been employed with the defense contractor “since April of 
2000.” (TR at page 26 lines 23~25.) She has held a security clearance, off and on, since 
April of 2000. (TR at page 26 line 23 to page 27 line 5.) She is a single mother, and has 
five adult children, two of whom are veterans of the U.S. military. (TR at page 24 line 16 
to page 26 line 12.)   
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes  her past, alleged, financial difficulties to a period of 
unemployment beginning in November of 2014 and continuing until February of 2015. 
(TR at page 28 line 16 to page 31 line 18, and GX 1 at pages 12~15.) Her then 
employer asked her to participate in unethical conduct.  When Applicant refused, she 
was fired. (Id.) She has now addressed all of the alleged past-due debts. 
 
 1.a. Applicant is in the process of getting a loan modification of her mortgage 
payments with Creditor A. (TR at page 32 line 3 to page 36 line 3, and AppX A at pages 
1~2.) She has paid the modified rate as agreed to for three months; and as a result, this 
rate will soon be finalized as the permanent fixed rate. (Id.) Her loan modification is 
evidenced by documentation from Creditor A. (AppX A at pages 1~2.)  Applicant has 
about $200,000 of equity in her house.  (TR at page 35 line 20 to page 36 line 2.) I find 
that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this mortgage debt. 
 
 1.b. Applicant has set up a payment plan with Creditor B by which she made an 
initial, good-faith payment of $631, and monthly payments of $140 towards her $6,059 
past due debt. (TR at page 36 line 4 to page 38 line 10, and AppX A at pages 3~4.)  
This is evidenced by financial documentation. (AppX A at pages 3~4 and 6.)  I find that 
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this credit card debt. 
 
 1.c. Applicant’s past-due debt to Creditor C, in the amount of about $5,033, was 
written-off as a business tax write-off by Creditor C. (TR at page 38 line 11 to page 40 
line 21.) As a result, Applicant declared this write-off as income on her 2016 Federal 
Income Tax return, as evidenced by that return, and by an Internal Revenue Service 
 
3 
 
Form 1099A. (Answer at pages 6~7.) I find that Applicant has made a good-faith effort 
to address this debt. 
 
 1.d. Applicant has set up a payment plan with Creditor D by which she made an 
initial, good-faith payment of $631, and monthly payments of $75 towards her $1,890 
past due debt.  (TR at page 40 line 22 to page 42 line 18, Answer at page 8, and AppX 
A at pages 7.)  This is evidenced by financial documentation.  (Answer at page 8, and 
AppX A at page 7.)  I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this 
credit card debt. 
 
 1.e. and 1.f. Applicant has paid her past-due medical debts with Creditor E 
totaling about $85. (TR page 42 line 19 to page 43 line 16.)  This is evidenced by 
documentation from Creditor E’s “Debt Collection Agency.”  (AppX A at pages 8~10.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant has paid her past-due debt with Creditor G for about $28.  (TR 
page 43 line 17 to page 45 line 3.)  This is evidenced by documentation from Creditor 
G.  (Answer at page 9.) 
 
 1.h. and 1.i. Applicant has paid her past-due medical debts with Creditor H for 
about $475.  (TR page 45 line 4 to page 46 line 8.)  This is evidenced by documentation 
from Creditor H.  (Answer at pages 10~16.) 
 
 1.j.~1.l. Applicant has set up a payment plan with Creditor J by which she made 
an initial,  good-faith payment of $200, and monthly payments of $100 towards her past- 
due debts totaling about $993.  (TR at page 46 line 9 to page 48 line 1, at page 60 line 
15 to page 62 line 4, and Answer at page 17.)  This is evidenced by correspondence 
from Creditor J. (Answer at page 17.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to 
address this credit card debt.  
    
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant had significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of her being fired when she refused 
to participate in unethical business practices. She has addressed all of her alleged 
delinquencies. She has demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) and 20(c) have been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant has a 
distinguished history of working in the defense industry, as shown by seven laudatory 
letters of recommendation. She obviously performs well at her job.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.l.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
