 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14379 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 3, 2014, and requested a hearing. The case 
was assigned to me on September 11, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 26, 2014, setting the hearing 
for October 7, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted into 
evidence over Department Counsel’s objection to AE G. The record was held open for 
the parties to submit additional evidence. Applicant submitted AE I through S, which 
were admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on October 17, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and has worked for a government contractor for 22 
years (with breaks in service caused by layoffs). He has a high school diploma and has 
taken some college courses. He is married and has two children. He has held a secret 
security clearance since 1999 without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on eight accounts and filed a 
bankruptcy petition in 2001 that resulted in a discharge of his indebtedness. The debts 
were listed on credit reports from August 2011, February 2013, and March 2014. 
Applicant essentially admitted all the debts in his answer to the SOR. During his 
testimony he provided documentary evidence showing that SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i were the 
same debt.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began when he was laid off from his employment 
in the early 2000s. He incurred expenses during that time when his income was 
substantially less, resulting in debt that he could not pay. He filed for bankruptcy 
protection in April 2001 and his debts were discharged by the bankruptcy court in 
August of 2001. He was recalled by his employer and has continuously worked for his 
employer since then. In 1999, his wife was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS). Her 
condition caused her to quit her job in 2006. Although she receives disability for her 
medical condition, it is a lesser amount than her job provided. His wife was in charge of 
the family’s finances during this time, but because of her MS she failed to pay their bills 
when they were due. This led to Applicant taking over the finances and working with a 
debt relief company (DRC-1) to pay their bills. The first debt relief company was not a 
reputable business and Applicant paid about $300 to $400 per month to it for two years, 
but the money was not distributed to creditors. This occurred in about 2007. Applicant 
admitted that he failed to timely pursue another option after his bad experience with 
DRC-1. In 2010, he contacted another debt relief company (DRC-2) and began working 
with it to resolve his delinquent debts. He has worked with DRC-2, who was settled 
several debts, and established payment plans for the remaining outstanding SOR debts. 
The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 34; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 44-45; Answer; AE G, J. 
 
3 Tr. at 34-37, 52, 58; Answer; AE P. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: 
 
 This is a credit card debt that has been repeatedly sold to collection companies 
in the amount of $739. Applicant presented documentation showing he settled this debt 
with a payment of $295.66 in June 2014. This debt is resolved.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $580. Applicant presented 
documentation showing “settlement in full” with a payment of $353.30 in June 2014. 
This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $4,926. Applicant settled this debt for 
$2,955 by establishing a monthly payment plan in the amount of $246. He made his first 
payment in July 2014 and has made payments through September 2014. This debt is 
being resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
 Applicant presented documentation from DRC-2 indicating that this is a credit 
card debt that is duplicative of SOR debt ¶ 1.i. He is still working with DRC-2 towards 
settlement with the creditor. He also received an IRS Form 1099-C indicating a 
cancellation of debt, which he claimed on his 2013 income tax return. This debt is being 
resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $4,899. Applicant is in the process of 
settling this debt and tendered a check for $1,500 in October 2014 towards that effort. 
This debt is being resolved.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $1,898. DRC-2 verified that this debt 
was settled for $855 when Applicant made three payments of $285 in the months of 
July, August, and September 2014. This debt is resolved.9 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 40; AE A, Q.  
 
5 Tr. at 42; AE C, R.  
 
6 Tr. at 46; AE I.  
 
7 Tr. at 44-45; AE G, J.  
 
8 Tr. at 43; AE M.  
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $6,649. Applicant has directed DRC-2 
to engage in settlement discussions with the creditor. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $250. Applicant presented 
documentation showing he settled this debt with a payment of $307 in July 2014. This 
debt is resolved.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: 
 
 See SOR ¶ 1.d above.  
 
 Applicant’s current income is about $6,000 per month, and he is current on all his 
other debt. He has a mortgage on his home, which is current, and he has no new credit 
card debt. He has disposable income at the end of the month of about $1,300.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
9 Tr. at 46; AE B, S.  
 
10 Tr. at 47.  
 
11 Tr. at 48; AE F, K.  
 
12 Tr. at 53-54; GE 5; . 
 
 
5 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 
6 
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts and a prior bankruptcy. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent, however, the 
bankruptcy is over ten years old. He has paid several debts and set up payment plans 
for others. Since he has made a concerted effort to repair his financial position, it is 
reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant became indebted when his wife was diagnosed with MS, stopped 
working because of her condition, and was unable to keep up with the family’s financial 
responsibilities. These were conditions beyond his control and, once he was able to do 
so, he acted responsibly by first contacting DRC-1 and made payments to the company 
for two years believing that those payments were going to his creditors. However, that 
was not the case and Applicant later turned to DRC-2, which assisted him in paying 
several creditors and setting up payment plans for other creditors. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant received credit counseling from DRC-2. He is making a good-faith 
effort to resolve all the debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence 
showing the settlement payments and payment plans. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s long-term service to his employer, as well as his wife’s 
medical condition, which affected their financial status. I found Applicant to be honest 
and candid about the circumstances that led to his debts. He is committed to settling all 
of his outstanding SOR-related debts. I found nothing to indicate a likelihood that 
Applicant would find himself in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
