 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-04023 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a citizen and resident of Canada. He has strong connections to 
Canada. Financial considerations and personal conduct concerns are mitigated; 
however, foreign influence and foreign preference concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2011, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On February 
28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines B (foreign influence), C (foreign preference), F (financial considerations), 
and E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) as revised by the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Intelligence on August 30, 2006, which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
Based on information available to the Government, DOD adjudicators could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, and it recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On May 15, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On June 30, 2014, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On July 3, 2014, DOHA assigned the 
case to me. On October 29, 2014, November 5, 2014, and November 19, 2014, DOHA 
issued notices of the hearing, setting the hearing for November 20, 2014. (HE 1B-1D) 
On November 26, 2014, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for 
December 2, 2014. (HE 1A) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, 
time, and place of the hearing. (Tr. 16-17) The hearing was held on December 2, 2014. 
I received the transcript of the hearing on December 10, 2014.     
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits, and Applicant offered 
nine exhibits. (Tr. 20-25; GE 1-5; AE A-I) There were no objections, and I admitted all 
proffered exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 21, 25-26; GE 1-5; AE A-I)  
 
I took administrative notice (AN) of facts from the U.S. Department of State 
website concerning Canada.1 Administrative or official notice is used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 
F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.h, 2.c to 
2.g, 3.a, and 4.a, and he provided mitigating information. (HE 3) He denied the 
remaining allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old chief software engineer, who seeks a security 
clearance to facilitate his work with a DOD contractor. (Tr. 6, 31) In 1984, he graduated 
from high school. (Tr. 6) In 1989, he was awarded a bachelor’s of applied science in 
engineering degree from a Canadian university. (Tr. 7) He married in 1990, began 
                                            
1 See Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, “U.S. Relations With Canada Fact Sheet” (Sept. 
10, 2014), http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2089.htm.   
 
2To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
divorce proceedings in 2004, and was divorced in 2014. (Tr. 7) His daughter is 16, and 
his stepson is 15. (Tr. 8)    
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant is a dual United States and Canadian citizen, who resides in Canada. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) His mother, father, sister, and child are citizens and residents of Canada. 
(Tr. 131-133; SOR response to ¶¶ 1.b-1.e) His common-law partner is a citizen and 
resident of Canada. (Tr. 113; SOR ¶ 1.g) Applicant and his partner have lived together 
for eight years. (Tr. 114) His partner is a director of marketing in a company, which is 
not associated with the Canadian Government. (Tr. 115) Applicant has extensive 
contacts with Canadian citizens, including members of his partner’s family. (Tr. 116) He 
has close and frequent contacts with his family members living in Canada. (Tr. 132-133) 
His grandmother was a citizen and resident of Canada, and she is now deceased. (Tr. 
133; SOR ¶ 1.f) 
 
 Applicant has Canadian bank accounts with about $5,000 in them. (Tr. 134; SOR 
response to ¶ 1.h) He receives his pay from the DOD contractor by direct deposit into a 
Canadian bank. (Tr. 128) He does not have a Canadian retirement account, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.i because it was cashed out to fund legal expenses connected to his 
divorce. (Tr. 134-135) He does not control $100,000 from the sale of his home in 
Canada, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j because the funds were either paid to his former 
spouse or to creditors. (Tr. 135-136) Applicant may inherit property in Canada from his 
mother. (Tr. 122)  
  
Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant surrendered his Canadian passport to his security representative. (Tr. 
118-119; SOR ¶ 2.a) He previously used his Canadian passport for international travel. 
(Tr. 118-119) Prior to his hearing, Applicant said he would probably renew his Canadian 
passport. (Tr. 120; GE 1) At his hearing, he said he did not see any reason why he 
would need to renew his Canadian passport after it expires, and he would probably not 
renew it. (Tr. 119-121)  
 
Applicant’s college attendance in Canada was subsidized by the Canadian 
Government; and his health insurance is provided by a province of the Canadian 
Government. (Tr. 122-123; SOR response to ¶¶ 2.b-2.c) His father supported his 
attendance at the Canadian college, which was primarily based on his father’s 
Canadian employment. 
 
Applicant participates in a Canadian pension plan and social insurance plan; he 
pays Canadian taxes; he votes in Canadian elections; and he has a Canadian driver’s 
license. (Tr. 127-130, 134, 137; SOR response to ¶¶ 2.d-2.g) He works out of a home 
office located in Canada. (Tr. 127) Applicant and his partner planned to continue to live 
in Canada for at least another five years. (Tr. 158) 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant filed for Canadian Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in August 2008, and his 
debts were discharged in June 2012. (Tr. 138; SOR response to ¶ 3.a) Applicant went 
through a difficult, litigious, and expensive divorce. (Tr. 102-107) He is required to pay 
spousal support as follows: $3,000 monthly in 2014; $2,900 monthly in 2015; $2,500 
monthly in 2016; and $2,000 monthly in 2017. (Tr. 111) His child support responsibility 
is $1,040 monthly until August 2016. (Tr. 109, 111) He is able to maintain a budget and 
pay his expenses. (Tr. 113, 159-160; SOR response; GE 3) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant had an unpaid debt that was referred for 
collection originating from a U.S. bank in the amount of $28,050. (SOR ¶ 3.b) Applicant 
had no knowledge of this debt, and it would have been difficult for him to borrow in the 
midst of his Canadian bankruptcy. (Tr. 108) Applicant planned to dispute the debt. (Tr. 
109, 147-148) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 DOHA interrogatories asked Applicant to provide federal income tax transcripts 
from 2008 to 2012, and Applicant failed to do so. (SOR ¶ 4.a) As part of his May 15, 
2014 SOR response, Applicant provided unsigned and undated copies of his U.S. 
federal tax returns for 2008-2012, and he said his 2008 Canadian taxes were settled on 
May 8, 2014. (HE 3) In November 2014, he filed his federal income tax returns for 2009 
to 2012. (Tr. 107, 144, 157) He received a U.S. federal income tax credit for Canadian 
taxes paid, and he did not file his U.S. federal income tax returns sooner because there 
was no tax owed. (Tr. 157; SOR response) He did not investigate whether he could 
have paid his U.S. federal income taxes and then sought a credit for U.S. federal 
income taxes paid on his Canadian tax returns. (Tr. 158) He requested relief in regard 
to his 2008 tax filing, and he has not filed his 2008 tax return. (Tr. 107, 144) Applicant 
provided the following U.S. federal income tax information: 
 
Tax Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
Gross Income $146,466 $140,192 $131,807 $106,706 $110,626 $145,966 
Foreign Tax 
Credit 
$37,371 $28,818 $28,532 $22,094 $22,941 $32,531 
Federal Income 
Taxes due 
$3,363 $2,304 $2,234 $0 $68 $153 
 
 
Tax Year 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 
Gross Income $134,080 $83,535 $119,011 $151,901 $133,492 
Foreign Tax 
Credit 
$29,015 $14,731 $24,414 $33,489 $28,108 
Federal Income 
Taxes due 
$5,772 
Refund 
$6,055 
refund 
$105 
refund 
$0 $0 
  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Connections to the United States 
 
Applicant was born in the United States, and he lived in the United States for the 
first four or five years of his life. (Tr. 152) He lived in the United States from 1989 to 
1993 or 1994. (Tr. 121-122) His total time in the United States is about ten years. (Tr. 
153) He votes in U.S. presidential elections. (Tr. 137) He states that he is loyal to the 
United States, and he would conscientiously comply with the requirements for access to 
classified information. (Tr. 152) Applicant’s parents and sister are not U.S. citizens. (Tr. 
155) He does not have a U.S. driver’s license. (Tr. 155-156) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant worked on various projects over the years that contributed to the U.S. 
national interests. (Tr. 98) He had access to sensitive, but not classified information. (Tr. 
98-99) The lack of a security clearance limited his contributions to the United States. 
(Tr. 99-100) 
  
Applicant’s employer and company president has known Applicant for 20 years. 
(Tr. 31; AE C) His acquisition program manager has known Applicant since May 2013. 
(Tr. 45-46) The lead systems engineer on the program knows Applicant from when they 
were working on the current project together. (Tr. 56-57) An active duty lieutenant 
commander, who is the program test director, has known Applicant from when they 
were working on the current project together. (Tr. 63-64) The company’s chief financial 
officer has known Applicant for about 20 years. (Tr. 69-70; AE B) The company’s chief 
of operations is a retired Navy officer and Applicant’s supervisor, who has known 
Applicant since 2006. (Tr. 80-87; AE D) A former manager worked with Applicant for 
four years when Applicant was a consultant. (AE F) A U.S. Marine has known Applicant 
for 16 years. (AE G) An engineering project manager has worked with Applicant for 
seven years. (AE H) A systems engineer has known Applicant personally and 
professionally. (AE I) Applicant’s references described Applicant as thorough, 
professional, generous, discrete, reliable, honest, loyal, conscientious, trustworthy, 
intelligent, articulate, and invaluable to his company. (Tr. 32-93; AE B-I) They supported 
approval of his access to classified information. (Tr. 32-93; AE B-I) 
 
Canada 
 
Canada is a democracy, with a relatively low level of crime, and the threat of 
terrorism is modest. The Canadian Government complies with the rule of law and 
protects civil liberties. The United States and Canadian Governments are allies in the 
war on terrorism. Canada and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy 
and trade. The State Department’s U.S. Canada Relations Fact Sheet, supra note 1, 
provides as follows:  
 
The United States and Canada share two borders and their bilateral 
relationship is one of the closest and most extensive in the world. It is 
reflected in the high volume of bilateral trade--more than $2 billion a day in 
goods and services--and in people-to-people contact. About 300,000 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
people cross between the countries every day by all modes of transport. In 
fields ranging from security and law enforcement to environmental 
protection to free trade, the two countries work closely together on multiple 
levels, from federal to local. 
 
U.S. defense arrangements with Canada are more extensive than 
with any other country. The Permanent Joint Board on Defense provides 
policy-level consultation on bilateral defense matters. The United States 
and Canada share North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) mutual 
security commitments, and U.S. and Canadian military forces cooperate 
on continental defense within the framework of the binational North 
American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD). 
 
The Beyond the Border initiative outlines a cooperative vision for 
perimeter security and economic competitiveness. The United States and 
Canada work in partnerships within, at, and away from our borders to 
achieve enhanced security and accelerate the legitimate flow of people, 
goods, and services between our two countries. The effort also includes 
collaboration in areas such as counterterrorism, aviation and maritime 
security, health security, visa screening, trusted traveler and trusted trader 
programs, emergency management, critical infrastructure protection, and 
cybersecurity. Extensive law enforcement ties include collaboration in risk 
assessment/analysis, incident management, and coordinated messaging. 
Successful joint law enforcement programs with Canada include the 
Integrated Border Enforcement Teams (IBET), Border Enforcement 
Security Taskforces (BEST), and the ShipRider Integrated Cross Border 
Maritime Law Enforcement program. The Cross Border Crime Forum 
(CBCF), chaired by the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of 
Homeland Security with Canadian counterparts, meets regularly. More 
recent efforts include improvement of cross-border law enforcement radio 
interoperability. 
 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) conducts preclearance 
operations at eight Canadian airports, allowing air travelers to complete 
customs and immigration procedures before boarding their flight to the 
United States. The two countries intend to enhance preclearance 
operations and expand them to cover land, rail, and ferry/cruise travel as 
part of the Beyond the Border Action Plan. 
 
The United States and Canada cooperate to resolve and manage 
transboundary environmental and water issues. A principal instrument of 
this cooperation is the International Joint Commission, established under 
the 1909 Boundary Waters Treaty. Under the Columbia River Treaty, 
Canada and the United States jointly regulate and manage the Columbia 
River as it flows from British Columbia into the United States. The two 
countries cooperate on a range of bilateral fisheries issues and 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
international high seas governance initiatives, and are both founding 
members of the Arctic Council. 
 
The bilateral Clean Energy Dialogue is charged with expanding 
clean energy research and development, developing and deploying clean 
energy technology, and building a more efficient electricity grid based on 
clean and renewable energy. These efforts will reduce greenhouse gases 
and combat climate change in our shared air environment. Canada is an 
ally of the United States in international climate change negotiations. 
Canada participates in the multilateral Major Economies Forum on Energy 
and Climate; the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and 
Climate, which aims to accelerate clean energy technologies in major 
industrial sectors; and the International Carbon Sequestration Leadership 
Forum, which researches effective ways to capture and store carbon 
dioxide. 
 
*  *  * 
 
Bilateral Economic Relations 
 
The United States and Canada share the world's largest and most 
comprehensive trading relationship, which supports millions of jobs in 
each country. Canada is the single largest foreign supplier of energy to the 
United States. Canada is the third largest holder of oil reserves after Saudi 
Arabia and Venezuela and is the only non-OPEC member in the top five. 
Canada and the United States operate an integrated electricity grid under 
jointly developed reliability standards. Uranium mined in Canada helps 
fuel U.S. nuclear power plants. 
 
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) among the 
United States, Canada, and Mexico has reduced trade barriers and 
established agreed upon trade rules. It has resolved long-standing 
bilateral irritants and liberalized rules in several areas: including 
agriculture, services, energy, financial services, investment, and 
government procurement. The Regulatory Cooperation Council seeks to 
stimulate even more trade by increasing bilateral regulatory transparency 
and cooperation and eliminating unnecessary differences and duplication 
that hinder trade and investment. 
 
Canada and the United States have one of the world's largest 
investment relationships. The United States is Canada's largest foreign 
investor, and Canada is the third-largest foreign investor in the United 
States. U.S. investment is primarily in Canada's mining and smelting 
industries, petroleum, chemicals, the manufacture of machinery and 
transportation equipment, and finance. Canadian investment in the United 
States is concentrated in finance and insurance, manufacturing, banking, 
information and retail trade, and other services. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Bilateral trade disputes are managed through bilateral consultative 
forums or referral to NAFTA or World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute 
resolution procedures. Canada has challenged U.S. trade remedy law 
under NAFTA and the WTO dispute settlement mechanisms. Canadian 
goods are exempted from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act’s 
“Buy American” provisions. The United States has encouraged Canada to 
strengthen its intellectual property laws and enforcement. In October 
2012, Canada joined the United States and other countries in negotiation 
of the Trans-Pacific Partnership regional trade agreement. 
 
Canada's Membership in International Organizations 
 
In addition to their close bilateral ties, Canada and the United 
States cooperate in multilateral fora, including international efforts to 
combat terrorist financing and money laundering. The two countries 
belong to a number of the same international organizations, including the 
United Nations, NATO, WTO, G7, G20, Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe, Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, Organization of American States, and Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation forum. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant was born in the United States and educated in Canada. His parents, 
partner, sibling, child, and his spouse’s family are all Canadian citizens and live in 
Canada. He pays Canadian income taxes, and the Canadian equivalent of U.S. Social 
Security and Medicare taxes. His monthly check for his work on behalf of a DOD 
contractor is deposited into a Canadian bank. He has lived in Canada for 39 out of 49 
years. He has been a resident of Canada since 1995, and he did not express an 
intention to move to the United States in the next five years.  
 
AG ¶ 7(d) applies because Applicant lives with his partner in Canada. She is a 
citizen and resident of Canada, and she is not a citizen of the United States. His partner 
is close to her family and friends and values her Canadian employment.   
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and 
obligation to his partner. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there 
is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d).  
 
Applicant’s partner’s communications with her family, who are citizens and 
residents of Canada, are not fully described in the record, and there is insufficient 
evidence to establish a security concern in regard to her partner’s relationships with her 
family and friends living in Canada. 
 
Applicant’s possession of close family ties with his partner, parents, child, and 
sibling living in Canada, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
However, if an applicant or their partner has a close relationship with even one relative, 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
  
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. His relatives and the Canadian Government do not have any of these attributes 
The relationship of Canada with the United States places a low burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his family and friends living in Canada do not pose a 
security risk. Nevertheless, the Appeal Board has required a foreign influence analysis 
in situations involving close United States allies. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 
2-6 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (reversing grant of clearance in part because of applicant’s 
connections to Germany); ISCR Case No. 07-14151 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Sept. 10, 2008) 
(reversing grant of clearance because of applicant’s connections to Mexico); ISCR Case 
No. 07-00434 at 2-4 (App. Bd. July 18, 2008) (affirming denial of clearance for applicant 
with connections to Belgium and Canada). Applicant should not be placed in a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist Canada or his family living in Canada.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his partner, or his 
family living in Canada, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in 
the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services. Applicant’s relationships with family 
members living in Canada create a potential conflict of interest because these 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist 
his family members in Canada by providing sensitive or classified information. 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his 
partner and family living in Canada. Department Counsel has raised the issue of 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is mitigated because Applicant’s grandmother has passed away. SOR 
¶¶ 1.i and 1.j are mitigated because his retirement fund and the funds received from the 
sale of his home in Canada were liquidated to pay his debts.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his partner, parents, child, and sister, who are living in Canada. His loyalty and 
connections to his family living in Canada are positive character traits. However, for 
security clearance purposes, those same connections negate the possibility of 
mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing 
there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with partner and his relatives who are 
Canadian citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has some 
connections to the United States. He was born in the United States, and he lived for 
about 10 out of 49 years of his life in the United States. He is loyal to the United States, 
and he said he would conscientiously comply with the requirements for access to 
classified information. He has contributed to the U.S. national defense though his work 
for U.S. Defense contractors.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his close relationships with his partner and family 
living in Canada. His parents, sister, and child are not U.S. citizens or residents of the 
United States, and he does not have a U.S. driver’s license. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Canadian Government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his partner, or their family to 
coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a low possibility 
that Applicant or his partner or family living in Canada would be specifically selected as 
targets for improper coercion or exploitation.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in Canada and 
the close military relationship between the two countries.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant or his spouse’s involvement with family members living in Canada. Applicant 
is not required to report his contacts with citizens or residents of Canada. AG ¶ 8(f) has 
limited application because it is only available to mitigate security concerns arising 
under AG ¶ 7(e).3 Applicant does not have investments in the United States.  
 
                                            
3AG ¶ 7(e) reads, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In sum, Applicant’s close connections to his partner and his family living in 
Canada are significant. Although Applicant has some connections to the United States, 
they are insufficient to outweigh his connections to Canada as well as his connection to 
his partner and family living in Canada. These connections raise an unmitigated foreign 
influence security concern under Guideline B.     
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes one condition with seven subparts that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 10(a) provides: 
 
 (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests 
in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
The scope of AG ¶ 10 is not limited to the specifically enumerated disqualifying 
conditions and includes obtaining and renewing a Canadian passport; coverage by the 
Canadian health plan, even though he may not have received benefits from the plan; 
participation in the Canadian equivalent of the U.S. Social Security and Medicare plans; 
payment of Canadian income taxes; and voting in Canadian elections; obtaining and 
using a Canadian driver’s license. AG ¶ 10(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case:  
  
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government.  
 
AG ¶ 11(e) applies to Applicant’s Canadian passport. He surrendered it to his 
security officer, and SOR ¶ 2(a) is mitigated. Applicant’s use of the Canadian 
scholarship in SOR ¶ 2(b) is mitigated because he attended college based primarily on 
his father’s Canadian employment and residency in Canada.   
 
SOR ¶¶ 2(c) to 2(g) are not mitigated and are connected to his residency in 
Canada for the previous 19 years. He has shown a very strong preference for Canada, 
and there is every indication he is a good Canadian citizen and resident. Foreign 
preference concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant admitted his Canadian 
Chapter 13 Bankruptcy, and a credit report alleged that Applicant had an unpaid debt 
that was referred for collection originating from a U.S. bank in the amount of $28,050. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(c) apply to Applicant’s Canadian Chapter 13 Bankruptcy. 
Applicant accrued delinquent debt at least in part because of his divorce. He made the 
required payments into his bankruptcy payment plan, and his debts were discharged in 
2012.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debt in SOR ¶ 2.b. Applicant had no knowledge of this 
$28,050 debt. It would have been difficult for him to borrow in the midst of his Canadian 
bankruptcy. Applicant planned to dispute the debt. There is no evidence that the creditor 
has sought to enforce this debt by obtaining a judgment or garnishing Applicant’s pay.      
    
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
17 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant admitted responsibility for and took reasonable and responsible actions 
to resolve his debts through bankruptcy. There are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved and is under control. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
 
18 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations. 
 
Both disqualifying conditions apply. The Government produced substantial 
evidence that Applicant failed to provide his 2008 to 2012 IRS tax transcripts even 
though DOHA requested that he provide them. The burden of proof shifts to Applicant to 
explain, refute, or mitigate these disqualifying conditions.    
 
AG ¶ 17 provides one condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case. 
AG ¶ 17(f) provides, “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability.” The allegation that Applicant failed to provide IRS tax 
transcripts for the years 2008 to 2012 is not substantiated in light of his filing his tax 
returns from 2009 to 2012 in November 2014. The requested tax transcripts would not 
be generated by the IRS until after the tax returns were filed or generated by the IRS. 
The SOR did not allege that he failed to file his U.S. federal income tax returns when 
required under Guidelines E or F, and this failure is not held against him because the 
conduct is not alleged in the SOR. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B, C, F, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are less 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed 
any security violations. He was born in the United States and lived in the United States 
for about 10 years. His employer is a DOD contractor. He votes in U.S. elections. There 
 
19 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
is no evidence that terrorists or other foreign elements have specifically targeted 
Applicant since a U.S. Government contractor began employing him.   
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Canada must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and any dangers there.5 Canada is relatively safe. The Canadian 
Government complies with the rule of law and protects civil liberties. The United States 
and Canadian Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. Canada and the United 
States have close relationships in diplomacy, military affairs, and trade. Notwithstanding 
this close relationship, Canada and the United States may have serious policy disputes 
in the future. It cannot be ruled out that at some future time Canadian entities may seek 
classified or sensitive information from Applicant.     
 
Numerous impressive character witnesses, some of whom have worked with 
Applicant for decades, described Applicant as thorough, professional, generous, 
discrete, reliable, honest, loyal, conscientious, trustworthy, intelligent, articulate, and 
invaluable to his company. They supported approval of his access to classified 
information.  
 
The significant foreign influence and preference security concerns outweigh the 
evidence in support of his approval of access to classified information. Applicant’s 
partner, parents, child, and sibling are citizens and residents of Canada. Applicant is a 
citizen of Canada, has lived in Canada for the last 19 years, and plans to live in Canada 
for at least the next five years. He pays into the Canadian health plan and Canadian 
taxes. He complies with Canadian law. His pay is by direct deposit into a Canadian 
bank. He has a Canadian driver’s license, but not a U.S. driver’s license.        
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Although financial considerations and 
personal conduct concerns are mitigated, I conclude Applicant has not carried his 
burden and foreign influence and foreign preference concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i and 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
20 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.c to 2.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 4.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
