 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09038 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 30, 2014, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 5, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on August 26, 2014. He responded with documents that I have 
marked Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 1 through 3. The case was assigned to me on 
December 29, 2014. The Government exhibits included in the FORM (Items 4-7) and 
AE 1 through 3 are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2008, and he has worked overseas since at least 
January 2014. He has held a security clearance since about 2009. He served in the 
U.S. military from 1995 until he was honorably discharged in 1997. He served in the 
National Guard from 1997 until he was honorably discharged in 2003. He married in 
1997 and divorced in 2009. He married again in 2012. He has one minor child.1   
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling about $31,800. Applicant 
admitted owing all the debts.2 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce. Applicant and his then 
wife cosigned a loan for a car in 2005. Applicant took the car after they separated, and 
he agreed to make the payments. In about 2007, he tried to trade the car for the 
purchase of another vehicle. His ex-wife would not permit transfer of the car. Applicant 
did not want to continue making loan payments for a car that he could not trade or sell. 
He voluntarily returned the car to the lienholder. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges the charged-off 
deficiency balance of $5,998 on the loan.3 
 
 The $10,546 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a joint debt. Applicant 
stated that he used the account to consolidate other debts in 2007. He stated that he 
paid the account until after his divorce. His ex-wife continued to draw on a line of credit 
on the account after their divorce. Applicant contacted his ex-wife and asked her to stop 
withdrawing from the account. She refused. Applicant stopped paying the debt in about 
2010 or 2011.4   
 
 The remaining six debts alleged in the SOR are individual debts. Applicant 
retained a debt resolution company in about December 2009. He paid the company 
$250 a month until June 2010, when he increased the payments to $500 per month. 
Applicant’s credit reports show a debt with a high credit of $754 was settled in 2010. 
This debt was not alleged in the SOR. Applicant terminated the contract with the debt 
resolution company in December 2010 because he felt his credit was at an acceptable 
level, and he could manage his debts on his own.5   
                                                          
1 Items 4, 7.  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Items 3-7.  
 
4 Items 3-7.  
 
5 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant discussed his delinquent debts when he was interviewed during his 
background investigation in April 2012. He responded to DOHA interrogatories about 
his finances in January 2014. He wrote that he paid an $82 debt that was not alleged in 
the SOR.6 He answered that he had made no payments toward his other delinquent 
debts: 
 
For all debts listed I haven’t taken any action as to [the debts] because I 
am currently out of the country, and would prefer to do business where 
communication is constant and dependable, and if need be I am readily 
available if my presence is needed.7   
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) with his response to 
DOHA interrogatories. He noted that he and his wife had a total net monthly income of 
$5,058, total monthly expenses of $1,357, and $530 monthly payments on a car loan, 
leaving a net remainder of $3,171. He did not report any payments toward his 
delinquent debts.8   
 
 In his April 2014 response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had opened a 
bank account, and he was depositing 15% of his wages into the account to be used to 
pay or settle his debts. In his September 2014 response to the FORM, he stated that he 
paid the $488 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, but he did not submit proof. He stated the 
payment letter from the collection company went to his address in the United States.9   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a delinquent debt of $1,305 owed to a gym. Applicant stated 
that he included “a receipt from one of my creditors ([gym]) which is proof I have been 
making payments to clear up my credit.” Applicant submitted a letter from the gym 
showing Applicant “agreed to pay $50 which is due by 08/29/2014.” He did not submit 
documented proof of any payments to the gym, but the letter cited the balance of the 
account as $1,204. Applicant stated that he contacted the collection company for the 
$647 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f to make arrangements to pay the debt. His plan is to 
pay one debt and then move on to the next.10   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
6 Item 7.  
 
7 Item 7.  
 
8 Item 7.  
 
9 Item 3; AE 2.  
 
10 Item 3; AE 1-3.  
 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce and the actions of his 
ex-wife. Those events were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant has worked for his current employer since May 2008. He has been 
divorced for more than five years. His PFS reflects $3,171 in discretionary income each 
month. Even if it is accepted without documentation that Applicant paid the $488 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, Applicant has made minimal efforts to pay his delinquent debts.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
 
6 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) is only applicable to the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. I find that financial considerations security concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his work overseas for a 
defense contractor. However, Applicant has unresolved financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
