 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08409 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 20, 2012. On 
July 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, citing 
security concerns under Guideline B. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR and timely requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2014. A notice of 
hearing was issued on November 19, 2014, scheduling the hearing for December 12, 
2014. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. Applicant testified, and requested that the record be kept open so that he 
could submit documentation. The record was held open until January 12, 2015. 
Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 23, 2014. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about India. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as HX I. 
Applicant did not object to the documents. (Tr. 13) I took administrative notice as 
requested by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out below 
in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and offered explanations. He provided additional 
information to support his case. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant was born in India in September 1971. In 1995, he received his 
undergraduate degree in India. He did not serve in the military in India. He came to the 
United States in November 1998 at the bequest of a contract company. He has received 
certifications in security matters. (AX A) Since 2003, he has worked for defense 
contractors, and has been with his current employer since 2010. (AX C; GX 1)  He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2009. (GX 1) Immediately after Applicant 
obtained his U.S. citizenship, he surrendered his Indian passport and renounced his 
Indian citizenship. This is his first application for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s wife also is a native of India. They were married in March 1996, and 
they have two children.  Applicant’s wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 
2009. She works in the home. (GX 2) 
 
 Applicant’s oldest child is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His youngest was born in the 
United States. Applicant never applied for a special status for them, such as the 
Overseas Citizens of India Program or the Person of Indian Origin Program (PIO). (AX 
A) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of India. His mother has 
worked in the home during the course of her marriage. Applicant’s father has a small 
shop. He has no ties to the military or the government of India. (Tr. 24) Applicant speaks 
to his mother usually once a month by phone. (Tr. 36) He contacts his father about four 
times a year. 
 
 Applicant has five brothers who are citizens and residents of India. None of his 
brothers work for the government of India. None of his brothers have any ties to the 
 
3 
 
 
military. They do not know the nature of Applicant’s work. (Tr. 26)  Applicant contacts 
his brothers by phone or email about five times a year. Applicant has a sister who is 
married and is a homemaker. (Tr. 27) Applicant talks with his sister twice a year. (GX 2) 
Neither his sister nor his brothers know that Applicant is seeking a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of India. His mother-in-law is 
about 69 years old. Applicant’s mother-in-law does not depend on Applicant and his 
wife for financial support. His wife calls her mother about three times a year. Applicant’s 
father-in-law is retired. (Tr. 27) Applicant speaks to his father-in-law once a year. (GX 2) 
 
 Applicant’s wife has four brothers who are citizens and residents of India. None 
of them have any ties to the Indian government or military. (Tr. 29) Applicant’s wife 
contacts them about four times a year. (GX 2) 
 
 Applicant has a sister-in-law who is a citizen and resident of India. She does not 
work. She is divorced. She sometimes tutors children in her home. She has no ties to 
the Indian government. (Tr. 30) 
 
 Applicant owns a condominium in India that is valued at approximately $80,000. 
He bought the condo in 2001 for about $10,000 to $15,000. (Tr. 30) His parents live in 
the condo. (GX 2) He is in the process of selling the condominium so that his parents 
can come to the United States. He wants to sell and convert the assets to the United 
States.  
 
 Applicant has a bank account in India which is valued at approximately $2,500. 
He also has a savings account in India that is worth about $7,000 U.S. dollars. He used 
the accounts when he traveled to India. (Tr. 32) 
 
  Applicant and his wife own two homes in the United States. His net worth is 
approximately $540,000.  He and his wife have savings and retirement accounts in the 
United States. (Tr. 33) Applicant owns company stock in the amount of approximately 
$20,000. (Tr. 21) 
 
 Since 2009, Applicant traveled to India about three or four times. Applicant’s 
mother came to the United States to help care for Applicant’s wife who was ill in 2008. 
(Tr. 34)    
 
 Applicant explained at the hearing that he plans to live the rest of his life in the 
United States, and raise and educate his children in the United States. He has roots in 
the United States both professionally and personally. His wife and children are with him 
in the United States. He feels blessed to be in the United States and has been a 
productive part of the society. He has never had any legal difficulties. He is fiscally 
responsible. He values integrity, honesty, and courage. He has been a good son to his 
parents, a good father to his children, a good husband to his wife and a good neighbor 
in his community. He knows that his family in India also love the United States and 
would not cause anything that would harm the interests of the United States. Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
has worked much of his adult life in the United States and has deep and long-term 
relationships. Since 2003, he has provided services to the defense contracting arena. 
Applicant was credible when he explained that in the unlikely situation that there would 
be pressure on him or his family, he would immediately contact his facility security 
officer.  
 
 Applicant is in the process of liquidating his property in India. He would like to 
have the assets so that he could bring his parents to the United States. (Tr. 39) He 
explained that the process of liquidating and selling the property is cumbersome and 
time consuming. He is moving as fast as he can to dispose of the property. 
 
 Applicant submitted a favorable reference letter from his superior, who has 
known Applicant for over ten years. He performs Applicant’s annual appraisal. Applicant 
is diligent, and detail oriented. He is prompt and communicates clearly with 
management and other personnel. He is a loyal citizen and a responsible member of 
the community. (AX A) 
 
 Applicant’s neighbor describes him as an energetic and conscientious person. 
She has known Applicant and his family since 2005. Applicant has served on the 
community board. He is valued for his honesty. (AX B) 
 
 Applicant submitted annual performance evaluations from the years 2011, 2012, 
and 2013.  Each evaluation attests to his quality work and troubleshooting skills. He has 
the trust of his team members. He takes initiative and is looked to for guidance and 
support. (AX D-F) 
 
Administrative Notice  
 
 India is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political history since it 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included several armed conflicts 
with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of 
the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit.  
 
 India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations. 
Starting this year, it is a non-permanent member of the Security Council, and it seeks a 
permanent seat on the Security Council. 
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and 
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law. 
 
5 
 
 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services.  
The United States is India’s largest foreign investment partner. Since December 
2006, direct civilian nuclear commerce with India has been permitted. The two countries 
have a common interest in the free flow of commerce and resources, including through 
the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by 
establishing working groups to address (1) strategic cooperation; (2) energy and climate 
change; (3) education and development; (4) economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) 
science and technology, health, and innovation.  
 
 In the past, India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet 
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
India is one of many countries engaged in economic intelligence collection and 
industrial espionage directed at the United States. The United States has longstanding 
economic issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade 
in dual-use technology. There have been numerous incidents of international 
businesses illegally exporting, or attempting to export restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States to India. 
 
 The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police 
and security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to 
suppress separatist and terrorist groups. There is no evidence that India uses torture or 
abuse against its citizens to extract economic intelligence.  
 
     Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
 
6 
 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
7 
 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(d). Fourth, AG ¶ 7 (e) 
may be at issue “if a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation” is present.  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since 1998. He is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s wife and children reside in the United States. His 
children are U.S. citizens, and his wife is a U.S. citizen. Neither Applicant nor his wife 
and children have any special status with India. 
 
Applicant’s parents, brothers, sister, and his wife’s family are citizens and 
residents of India.  A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ 
ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
Applicant acknowledges that he is close to his family. Applicant has not rebutted this 
presumption.  
 
After considering the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India as well as each 
individual tie, I conclude that Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant 
speaks to his mother by phone frequently and he saw her when she visited the United 
States and when he visited India. He maintains contact with his brothers and sister by 
phone several times a year. His wife speaks to her mother, father and her family in 
India. Based on all these circumstances, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) are 
raised. Applicant owns a condominium in India and has two Indian bank accounts. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 7(e) is at issue. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). India engages in economic and industrial espionage, and it has 
been involved in incidents involving illegal importation of restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States. Applicant’s parents, brothers and a sister are citizens and 
residents of India. His in-laws and wife’s family are citizens and residents of India. For 
these reasons, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant has held employment within the defense contract community since 2003 
without incident. He has worked with government contractors who provide excellent 
references. Applicant’s financial interests in the United States outweigh his financial 
interests in India. He and his wife have personal assets, including two homes, in the 
United States worth more than $540,000. Applicant and his wife surrendered their 
Indian passports and use their U.S. passports. They have not taken advantage of the 
convenience of an Indian PIO card. I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict 
 
9 
 
 
between the interests of the United States and his family in India in favor of the United 
States. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is established.  
 
 As to Applicant’s condominium in India, his parents live there. He is in the 
process of selling the property so that he can liquidate assets and bring his parents to 
the United States. Thus, I conclude that AG 8(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 
1998. He and his wife reside in the United States with their two children who are U.S. 
citizens. His wife is a U.S. citizen. He was articulate, candid, sincere, and credible at the 
hearing. He and his wife still have cultural, family, and emotional attachments to India, 
but they see the United States as the future home for their family. Applicant has been 
successful in the defense contracting business for many years.  His current employer 
recommends him for his professionalism and integrity.  
 
 Applicant chose to leave his home and emigrate from India in search of an 
education and career opportunities. He wants to provide for his family in the United 
States. He has worked hard in the security field and has received praise for his work 
ethic and accomplishments. Applicant purchased a home and has maintained excellent 
credit. His family intends to remain in the United States. He is an active member of his 
community. 
 
 India is a partner of the United States in the global war on terrorism. There is no 
evidence any of the individuals at issue are involved with, or under scrutiny, by interests 
 
10 
 
 
antithetical to the United States. Applicant returned to India on several occasions to see 
his family. He is in the process of selling the condominium in India. His significant 
financial worth in the United States outweighs his financial interests in India. 
 
 Regarding Applicant’s life in the United States, he is a contented American 
citizen, with a stable family, social, and professional life. His life is focused here. He is 
admired by his peers. He and his wife intend to continue their lives in the United States. 
There is no evidence indicating that he may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
power or interest. He credibly stated he would report any attempts to influence him to 
security. In light of these facts and the country at issue, I find that Applicant successfully 
mitigated foreign influence concerns.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
