 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04191 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4 2014, the Department of Defense Office Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on July 22, 2014. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 17, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
October 28, 2014, with a hearing date of December 4, 2014. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as a hearing 
exhibit (HE I). Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The record was kept open and Applicant timely 
submitted AE C and D, which were admitted into the record without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 16, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied the allegations listed in ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, 
but admitted the allegations listed in ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He is single with no children. He holds a high school 
diploma and has received some college credit for courses taken. He currently works for 
a government contractor in the security field. He began working for his current employer 
in 2002. He was promoted to supervisor in 2003. He has no military background. He 
has never held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) claiming that he obtained an 
associate’s degree when he did not earn such a degree in an application for a position 
of trust dated August 2003, in a security clearance application dated November 2011, 
and during an interview with a defense investigator in February 2012 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.c); (2) filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in December 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.d); and being 
arrested and convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) in August 2008. (SOR ¶ 
1.e). 
  
 From 1992 through 1997, Applicant attended a state university. He also attended 
a second college during the summer periods of 1993 and 1995. Overall, Applicant 
earned 79 credit hours and had a grade point average (GPA) of 1.706 (on a 4.0 scale, 
this GPA was below a “C” average). Since his major was electronics technology, he was 
eligible to receive an associate’s degree upon completing 72 hours of courses, including 
certain required courses. He did not achieve a degree.2 
 
 Applicant mistakenly believed he had achieved an associate’s degree. He 
believed this because while he was in school an indicator on his report cards changed 
from “undergraduate” to “associate of applied science.” When this change happened, he 
assumed he had taken enough courses to qualify for an associate’s degree. He 
acknowledged that he did not receive a diploma. When he filled out his position of 
trustworthiness application in 2003, his security clearance application in 2011, and 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4, 20-21, 29; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21; GE 3-4; AE A-B; Ans. 
 
 
3 
 
 
when he was interviewed by an investigator in 2012, he was still under the mistaken 
belief that he had achieved an associate’s degree. He had no intention of deceiving or 
misleading the Government by claiming he was awarded an associate’s degree when 
he really had not received one. He did not benefit in any manner by claiming to have 
such a degree. His job does not require that he have an associate’s degree. I find 
credible Applicant’s testimony that he reasonably believed he had an associate’s 
degree when he did not.3 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 2010. He incurred 
approximately $100,000 worth of debts while attending school, commuting to school, 
and when he underwent a medical procedure that was expensive and caused him to 
miss work. He entered into a Chapter 13 wage-earner plan and has been paying $116 
per month since October 2010. He will complete the payment plan later this year. His 
current financial condition is good. He has no delinquent debts and has accumulated 
$120,000 in his retirement account.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested for DUI in August 2008. He was drinking at a bar with a 
friend and after the evening out he followed the friend home in his car. He was stopped 
by law enforcement for running a stop sign. He was given field sobriety tests and asked 
to take a breathalyzer test. His test result was above the legal limit and he was arrested. 
He pleaded guilty and was sentenced. He paid his fine and completed all his court-
ordered requirements. He has not had another alcohol-related incident since then. He 
continues to drink socially, but does not drink and drive.5 
 
 Applicant presented a character statement from his work operations manager. 
She described him as a trusted and selfless supervisor who looks after the best 
interests of his employees. She also knows that he is a devout person in his personal 
life.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 22, 29, 31, 36-38; GE 1-3; Ans. 
 
4 Tr. at 24-25, 33, 39-40; GE 3; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 27-28; GE 3. 
 
6 AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
Applicant was under the mistaken belief that he had obtained an associate’s 
degree. He did not intend to deceive or mislead the Government when he supplied this 
information on the two forms and during the investigative interview. He had no motive to 
deceive because he had nothing to gain by claiming this degree. AG ¶¶ 16(a) - 16(b) do 
not apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c. Applicant’s 2008 DUI and 2010 bankruptcy, considered 
as a whole, support an assessment of questionable judgment. AG ¶ 16(c) applies to 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  Applicant’s DUI was seven years ago and there has been no similar recurrence 
since then. He has made all of his required bankruptcy plan payments over the past four 
years and is on track to complete the plan later this year. His current financial status is 
good. His operations manager attests to his trustworthiness. Given these 
circumstances, I find sufficient time has passed to reasonably conclude that such future 
behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) applies.   
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
his company. I also considered his demeanor and credibility while testifying about his 
mistaken belief concerning his degree status. Additionally, I considered the strong 
recommendation he received from his manager concerning his trustworthiness. I also 
considered that the DUI and bankruptcy occurred years ago and that he has taken 
appropriate mitigating action in each case. Applicant met his burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
