1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-01191
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Cheryl Van Ackeren, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant was diagnosed by a duly qualified mental health professional with a
condition that may impair her judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness, after exhibiting
irresponsible and violent behavior. She offered insufficient evidence to mitigate resulting
security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 27,
2011. On May 28, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline I (Psychological
Conditions). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 1, 2014 (AR), and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on September 24, 2014. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2014. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Video
Teleconference Hearing on November 21, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as
scheduled, on December 5, 2014. Applicant, her counsel, and the court reporter
attended the hearing in person. Department Counsel participated from DOHA
Headquarters by video teleconference. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1
through 4, which were admitted without objection; and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, a
Government exhibit list. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and presented testimony
from three other witnesses. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on
December 16, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a six-year-
old daughter, of whom she has partial custody, and for whom she pays her ex-husband
monthly child support. She is a high school graduate, who served on active duty in the
Army for more than two years before being honorably discharged in October 2007 due
to pregnancy. This is her first application for a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 38, 53, 57.)
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR, with
explanations. Applicant’s admissions, including her statements in response to DOHA
interrogatories (GE 2), are incorporated in the following findings.
Applicant and her husband were stationed in Germany when she became
pregnant with their daughter and decided to leave active duty. Her husband was an
inactive member of the National Guard at the time, but entered active duty upon their
return to the United States in October 2007. Their daughter was born in late March
2008. Shortly thereafter, she began an online relationship with a man in another state.
Her marriage deteriorated and she suffered from postpartum depression. In September
2008 she left her husband and daughter, and went to stay with her mother in a third
state for several weeks. In mid-October 2008, she moved to Alaska to live with her
online boyfriend. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 28-31, 46, 51-52.)
On the night of October 31, 2008, Applicant’s boyfriend called 911 to request
assistance after she assaulted him. She had consumed some amount of alcohol, but
the details surrounding this incident vary in different versions of events provided by
Applicant since then. She was arrested, charged with domestic violence assault, and
held in jail for several days before posting bail. After several days in a homeless shelter,
she moved back in with her boyfriend. Applicant agreed to undergo a court-ordered
treatment program at a VA facility, after successful completion of which the assault
charge would be dismissed. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 34-35.)
The licensed clinical social worker who performed Applicant’s January 2009 initial
assessment consult noted several inconsistencies in her report of the circumstances
Dysthymia is a mild but long term (chronic) form of depression formerly also called, “neurotic depression,” 1
and most recently renamed “Persistent Depressive Disorder” in the DSM 5.
3
surrounding her relationships and the assault incident, and said that her judgment was
“impaired.” She further reported: 
The veteran seems to be a poor historian and reporter of her current state
of being. She minimizes her assault on Halloween and does not seem to
connect her drinking, blackout, and subsequent arrest and restraining
order to be related to her drinking. The veteran seemed to have little
awareness of her current situation. The impact of abandoning her child,
the danger of moving to Alaska without knowing anyone except an internet
“friend”, etc. She seems to minimize the assault and a blackout from
drinking. Not concerned about whether she drinks again. Unaware of why
she would have a blackout, doesn’t think there’s a medical reason, but not
concerned that something like that could happen. 
The social worker diagnosed Applicant with Alcohol Abuse, and recommended that she
undergo an outpatient alcohol treatment program, as well as mental health counseling
and psychiatric treatment for depression. (GE 3 at 81-83.)
Applicant completed the VA counseling and treatment programs in late
September 2009. She was diagnosed with several different psychiatric/psychological
conditions throughout the course of her treatment, but her last mental health diagnosis
at that facility was PTSD; Alcohol Abuse in early full remission; and Dysthymia.  The1
PTSD diagnosis related to her early childhood sexual abuse by an uncle. (GE 3.) Her
criminal charge was dismissed, and she and her boyfriend moved to the state where
she now lives, and where her daughter was living with her husband’s parents while he
was deployed. She obtained employment at an automobile maintenance retailer, and
was promoted to the position of assistant manager of the facility after about a year. She
obtained her current employment in September 2011. (GE 1; GE 2.)
In February 2014, in connection with evaluating her eligibility for a clearance,
DOHA requested a mental health evaluation of Applicant by a clinical psychologist who
is a recognized expert in traumatic stress disorders. He met with Applicant for
evaluation four times in March and April 2014, and issued his report of the assessment
on April 23, 2014. He analyzed the results of his testing, and ruled out a number of
previous potential diagnoses in Applicant’s VA records. In the “RELEVANT HISTORY”
section of the report, he noted, “a pattern of documented inconsistencies or
discrepancies in [Applicant’s] divergent descriptions of events, calling into question the
veracity of her self-report.” He went on to say:
As commented by others in the narrative record, it is unclear whether the
pattern of inconsistencies in [Applicant’s] recall reflect intentional
deception, signs of severe psychopathology, notable learning and memory
deficits, a proclivity toward unintentional careless mistakes, a general
In Nov. 2011, she said that she was prescribed and started taking this medicine in June 2008. (GE 2 at 5)2
4
disposition viewing factual accuracy as less important, or possible
dissociative response to early childhood trauma. 
(GE 4 at 2.) Applicant told the clinical psychologist that her mother took her to a local
hospital during September 2008 due to worsening depression, where she was
prescribed antidepressant medication.  (GE 4 at 3.)   2
The clinical psychologist’s diagnostic summary and impressions began: 
In sum, the overall assessment findings reveal that [Applicant] is likely to
continue to be experiencing the chronic effects of a post-traumatic stress
injury sustained after years of early childhood sexual abuse, often referred
to as “complex PTSD” that does not neatly fit into current DSM diagnostic
criteria of PTSD. For instance, individuals with a history of severe early
trauma tend to exhibit patterns of interpersonal instability, troubles with
self-regulation, dissociation, and attachment difficulties. 
(GE 4 at 7.) He provided a DSM-5/ICD-10 Diagnosis of, “309.9 (F43) Unspecified
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorder.” (GE 4 at 8.) 
In response to the specific DOHA security clearance-related questions, he
concluded that Applicant has an emotional, mental, or personality condition that may
impair her judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. He said: 
[T]he most likely explanation . . . is an atypical or unspecified trauma-
related disorder, resulting from childhood trauma . . . that may impair her
judgment, reliability or trustworthiness during times of severe life
stressors. During most other times, [Applicant] has demonstrated the
capacity to function in an adaptive manner and is currently content with
work and her personal life. However, during times of extreme or chronic
stress, she can be prone to transient states of confusion and self-
dysregulation, which alcohol can help solicit by lowering cognitive
inhibition/control. 
(GE 4 at 8.) He further identified her condition, the degree to which it adversely affects
her judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness, and prognosis as follows:
Although she presently self-reports a non-clinical level of PTSD and
dissociative symptoms, [Applicant] continues to demonstrate memory
lapses that appear to be indicative of possible traumatic-
stress/dissociative reactions best characterized as 309.9 (F43)
Unspecified Trauma-and Stressor-Related Disorder. For example, she
commented that her current boyfriend and co-workers often get annoyed
with her repeating the same questions, and she had no recall of
5
discussing her auditory hallucinations and suicidal ideation with her VA
counselors. . . .  The degree of documented inconsistencies in
[Applicant’s] self-report from a variety of sources is highly unusual, and not
explained by her previous mental health diagnoses including PTSD, or
prescription of antidepressants. Of particular concern, is that [Applicant]
has resumed drinking alcohol moderately since completing the VA
treatment program as she had prior to her 1 November 2008 arrest, with
the reassurance (possibly false) that she can do so safely because she is
no longer taking antidepressant medications. She also terminated all
counseling. . . . [Applicant] presented in a credible, sincere, and candid
manner. Her written and verbal inconsistencies are not believed to be
conscious, intentional deception or malingering, but instead reflect a life-
long difficulty with memory integration and coping caused by early
extreme exposure to traumatic stress. During most times, she is able to
function in an adaptive manner and is currently quite content with work
and her personal life. However, during times of extreme or chronic stress,
she can be prone to transient states of confusion and self-dysregulation,
which alcohol can help solicit by lowering cognitive inhibition/control. 
(GE 4 at 8-9.) He concluded, “Overall, the record indicates that [Applicant] has been
compliant with treatment recommendations at the VA.” He “strongly advised [her] that
the safest measure avoid future repeat of events, is to remain sober and attend
counseling to better understand possible association with early childhood trauma, as
well as learn effective ways to cope with life stressors.” (GE 4 at 9.) Applicant has not
followed this advice, because she does not feel that any of the issues he outlined affect
her daily life or how she functions. (Tr. 50.)
Applicant broke off her relationship with the man she was arrested for assaulting,
and is now engaged to marry the man who was her manager at the automobile
maintenance retail company where she worked before obtaining her current
employment. He testified that she is reliable, that she functioned well in both routine and
high-stress situations, and that she is trustworthy and responsible. (Tr. 70-85.) Her
current supervisor testified that he finds her to be competent, reliable, and careful about
following security procedures to protect sensitive information. (Tr. 59-69.) Applicant’s
mother also testified. She confirmed that Applicant was exhibiting abnormal symptoms
of depression when she came to her home after leaving her husband and daughter in
2008, but also testified that Applicant refused her efforts to get Applicant to see a doctor
for help during that visit, contrary to Applicant’s testimony concerning those events. (Tr.
89-96.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
6
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions
AG ¶ 27 expresses the security concern pertaining to psychological conditions:
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is
7
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist)
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government,
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of seeking mental health counseling.
AG ¶ 28 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent,
paranoid, or bizarre behavior;
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take
prescribed medication.
Applicant exhibited behavior that casts doubt on her judgment and reliability,
involving emotionally unstable and violent conduct. She abandoned her husband and
newborn daughter to live in another state with a man she met over the internet; and who
she shortly thereafter assaulted leading to her arrest for domestic violence. A duly
qualified clinical psychologist employed by the U.S. Government found that she has a
condition that may impair her judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. She failed to
follow his recommendations concerning abstention from alcohol and counseling. This
evidence establishes all three disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to
Applicant to prove mitigation.
AG ¶ 29 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns raised by
the evidence in this case:
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the
treatment plan;
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified mental health professional;
8
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional
instability; and,
(e) there is no indication of a current problem.
Applicant did not provide evidence that would establish mitigation under any of
these conditions. She has recently worked satisfactorily in positions not involving high
levels of responsibility or discretion, but failed to follow recommended treatment
programs, and submit any evidence that her diagnosed condition is under control or in
remission. The clinical psychologist who evaluated her did not consider her condition to
be temporary or resolved. The record evidence is insufficient to dispute this conclusion. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Most recently, Applicant’s
conduct supported ongoing psychological concerns after evaluation by a qualified
mental health professional in 2014. She offered insufficient evidence to overcome those
conclusions or support findings of permanent behavioral change. Recurrence of
questionable judgment on her part was not shown to be unlikely. She did not
demonstrate a reduced susceptibility to coercion or duress. Overall, the record evidence
9
creates valid questions and doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for
a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline I: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
