 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00857 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On June 10, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On November 26, 2014, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was provided to 
Applicant on the same date, and it was received on December 9, 2014. Applicant was 
 
2 
 
 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information. The case was assigned to me 
on January 13, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and denied the allegation in ¶ 1.b. 
The admission is incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He served in the Army from 1978 to 1998 and retired 
with an honorable discharge. He married in 1980 and divorced in 1981. He remarried in 
1984 and separated from his wife in 2006. He has a child born in 1983. Appellant has 
held a security clearance since 1999. After his retirement from the Army in 1998, 
Applicant worked for federal contractors overseas, except for a short period of 
unemployed from December 2008 to March 2009. He has worked for his current 
employer, a federal contract, since 2009. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns on time for tax years 2006, 
2007, 2008, and 2009. During a background interview conducted on November 8, 2013, 
he explained why he failed to file his 2006 through 2012 federal income tax returns.1 He 
believed his income fell below the taxable amount for Americans living and working 
abroad, and he did not have to file. The threshold amount for being exempt from filing 
federal income taxes for Americans living and working overseas was $16,900 in 2006, 
$17,500 in 2007, $17,900 in 2008, and $18,700 in 2009. Applicant did not provide 
supporting documents that showed his gross income was below these amounts for the 
years listed. He provided a copy of his 2009 tax return which shows a gross income of 
$63,406. His military pension in 2012 was $14,021.2 
 
Applicant told the investigator that he received a letter from the IRS in late 2011 
asking why he did not have any federal taxes withheld from his pay. He stated he 
provided a form to the IRS showing he was exempt from withholding federal income 
taxes. Applicant’s statement to the investigator is confusing because he disputes he 
was told by the IRS that he failed to file his 2010 federal income tax return and owed 
taxes, but rather he was only notified about the withholding issue. However, he goes on 
to tell the investigator that shortly after being contacted by the IRS, he then filed his 
2010 federal income tax return. He indicated that two weeks after he filed his 2010 tax 
return he received another notification letter from the IRS advising him he had failed to 
file his 2011 tax return. He disputes this, but he said that he was notified that he failed to 
                                                          
1 I have only considered the years alleged in the SOR for failing to file for disqualifying purposes. 
However, the other years that Applicant admitted he failed to file timely returns can be considered when 
analyzing his credibility and under the whole-person. Applicant filed his 2011 federal income tax return on 
August 5, 2013. He filed his 2012 federal income tax return on December 23, 2013. A substitute tax 
return was prepared by the IRS for Applicant on November 19, 2012. Item 5. 
 
2 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
have taxes withheld. He then stated to the investigator that he filed his 2011 tax returns 
shortly thereafter.  
 
 Applicant indicated to the investigator that in June or July 2013 he contacted the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and was told his 2010 tax return was in the system, and 
was advised he needed to file his 2009 tax return. Applicant indicated he filed his 2009 
federal income tax return in August 2013. He told the investigator that he filed his 2012 
federal income tax return on November 7, 2013. He indicated to the investigator that he 
planned on filing his 2006, 2007, and 2008 tax returns before April 2014, and promised 
to file on time in the future.  
 
According to Applicant’s IRS transcripts, Applicant filed his 2006 federal income 
tax return on October 6, 2014. His 2007 federal income tax return was filed on October 
13, 2014. His 2008 federal income tax return was filed on July 7, 2014. His 2009 federal 
income tax return was filed on June 16, 2014.3 After 2011, Applicant was on notice that 
he was required to file federal income tax returns for prior tax years. He provided no 
explanation why he failed to do so until 2014.  
 
Applicant provided documentation that established he does not owe the IRS 
$10,698. The amount was an apparent error by the IRS, and I find in favor of Applicant 
on SOR ¶ 1.b.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
3 Item 5 is Applicant’s financial interrogatories. In it he stated that he filed his 2009 federal income tax 
return on February 15, 2014, which is inaccurate. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009 as required by law. I find 
the above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked overseas since 1998. He has been employed by 
federal contactors during almost all of his entire tenure overseas. He did not file his 
2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009 federal income tax returns until 2014. His explanation was 
that he believed he did not have to file because his income was exempt because his 
earnings were below the threshold. Applicant provided no explanation for why he 
presumably filed his federal income tax returns in years preceding 2006 and then 
stopped in the subsequent years. He provided no documents to show he was below the 
income threshold for filing federal income taxes. Although his income may have been 
exempt from federal taxation, a determination cannot be made until the federal 
government knows how much he earned overseas. That determination cannot be made 
until he filed his federal tax returns. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant was 
on notice that he had issues with his federal income tax filings and he did not comply 
with the requirements until June through October 2014. He offered no explanation for 
his delay. Insufficient evidence was provided to conclude that his conduct is unlikely to 
recur. His actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s tax issues were beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. There is evidence that Applicant has filed his delinquent tax returns for 
2006 through 2009. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. His delay in completing his tax returns after he 
was aware there was a problem does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve the 
problem. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He has lived and worked overseas since 1998. He 
failed to file his 2006 through 2009 federal income tax returns until 2014. Applicant did 
not offer a reasonable explanation for why he presumably filed his federal income taxes 
for previous years and then stopped in 2006. He did not provide evidence that his 
income was below the federal reporting level. Once he was on notice in 2011 that there 
were problems with previous years, he did not complete his obligation to file his federal 
income tax returns until 2014. Despite some evidence of mitigation, in that Applicant’s 
delinquent tax returns are now filed, he failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
