 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01506 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations, criminal conduct, or personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance 
and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On June 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility - Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 ((e-QIP), dated October 30, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make a preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 13, 2014. In a statement, notarized July 1, 
2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on September 26, 2014, and he 
was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 7, 2014. A response was due on November 6, 2014, but 
as of December 4, 2014, he had not submitted any response. The case was assigned to 
me on December 15, 2014. As of the date of this decision, no response had been 
received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied two of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.f. and 1.h.), but admitted all of 
the remaining factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.e., 1.g., and 1.i. through 1.l.) as well as all of the factual allegations pertaining to 
criminal conduct (¶ 2.a.) and personal conduct (¶¶ 3.a. and 3.b.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a records management specialist with his current employer since October 
2013 and as a part-time pizza delivery driver for another company since April 2013.3 He 
served on active duty in an enlisted status with the U.S. Navy from February 1993 until 
he retired honorably in February 2013.4 He graduated from high school in 1990.5 He 
was granted a secret security clearance in 1993.6 Applicant was married in June 1993. 
He and his wife have two children: a daughter born in 1992 and a son born in 1995.7  
                                                          
2
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated July 1, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 11-12. 
 
4
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 13-15; Item 8 (Personal Subject Interview, dated December 16, 2013), at 3. 
 
5
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 1. 
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 30-31. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 18-19, 24. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.a.): From May 2007 until August 2010, Applicant was a Navy chief 
petty officer (E-7) working in the disbursing office aboard a naval ship homeported 
overseas.8 In mid-2009, because his brother’s health condition was worsening with 
tuberculosis, and he was in need of hospitalization, food, aid, and medication, Applicant 
started sending him money.9 He estimated that he had given his brother $80,000.10 An 
unspecified portion of the money was not Applicant’s. While working in the disbursing 
office, Applicant altered and falsified travel claims submitted by sailors for 
reimbursement, and the funds were deposited in Applicant’s personal bank account.11 
He knew he was not entitled to the money, and he was aware that what he was doing 
was illegal.12 Following a criminal investigation conducted by the Naval Criminal 
Investigative Service (NCIS), in December 2010, Applicant was charged with criminal 
conduct under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). 
 
 Applicant was charged with making false official statements, in violation of Article 
107, UCMJ; two counts of larceny, in violation of Article 121, UCMJ; forgery, in violation 
of Article 123, UCMJ; and committing fraud against the United States, in violation of 
Article 132. He was subsequently tried by a Special Court-Martial, and as part of a 
pretrial plea agreement, he pled guilty to the two larceny charges, with the remaining 
charges dismissed. Applicant was sentenced to 85 days confinement, reduction from  
E-7 to E-5, ordered to forfeit $1,500, and fined $3,800.13 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant contends that while he was in confinement, he accrued a number of 
unpaid bills.14 His fine was finally paid off in May 2012 after his wages were garnished.15 
The forfeiture, fine, reduced active-duty salary, and retirement salary resulted in a 
reduced income, which contributed to his inability to maintain his monthly payments. In 
June 2013, he lost a vehicle to repossession because he could not maintain his 
payments.16 Nevertheless, in December 2013, Applicant told an investigator from the 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that he was capable of meeting all other 
                                                          
8
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
9
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4; Item 7 (Statement, dated December 16, 2010), at 1. 
 
10
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 5. 
 
11
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 1-2. 
 
12
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
13
 Item 6 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated December 3, 2013); Item, 8, 
supra note 4, at 3. 
 
14
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
15
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
16
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
4 
                                      
 
financial obligations.17 That statement was not accurate. In fact, a number of Applicant’s 
accounts were already delinquent, and they were either placed for collection or charged 
off. The SOR identified 11 purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $31,546 that had been placed for collection or charged off, as reflected 
by a November 2013 credit report.18  
 
When confronted with the delinquent accounts, Applicant initially claimed that he 
was unaware of them.19 He subsequently admitted that the following accounts alleged in 
the SOR remain unpaid and unresolved: a credit card that was past due and charged off 
in the amount of $1,137 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); an internet account with an unpaid balance of 
$137 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); a telephone account with a remaining balance of $2,004 (SOR ¶ 
1.c.); an unspecified bank loan that was past due and charged off in the amount of 
$1,660 (SOR ¶ 1.d.); an unspecified bank loan that was past due in the amount of $875 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.); an unspecified type of loan account that was past due and charged off in 
the amount of $4,179 (SOR ¶ 1.g.); a credit union account that was 180 days past due 
in the amount of about $11,766 (SOR ¶ 1.i.); an insurance account with an unpaid 
balance of $145 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); and a credit union account that was 180 days past due in 
the amount of $5,995 (SOR ¶ 1.k.).20 Applicant denied responsibility for the two 
remaining accounts (SOR ¶ 1.f.)  for a cash advance with an unpaid balance of $3,245, 
and (SOR ¶ 1.h.)  for a charged-off loan account in the amount of $402, claiming that he 
was overseas during the time-period in question and could not recall any memory of the 
companies involved. The two debts are listed in the credit report.21  
 
As of December 2013, Applicant had not received financial counseling nor 
sought any debt consolidation services.22 There is no evidence that he ever contacted 
his creditors in an effort to resolve his debts, or that he disputed the two debts with the 
credit reporting company. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be 
because he did not submit a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly 
income, his monthly household or debt expenses, or whether or not he has any funds 
remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. Applicant offered 
no evidence to indicate that his financial problems are now under control. In his Answer 
to the SOR, he did, however, state that he was “in the process of submitting a 
bankruptcy.”23 Applicant did not submit any documentation to support his bankruptcy 
comment. 
 
  
                                                          
17
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
18
 Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated November 28, 2013). 
 
19
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 7-8. 
 
20
 Item 5, supra note 18, at 6, 7, 9-10, 13-14, 16-17; Item 3, supra note 2, at 1-2, 4. 
 
21
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
22
 Item 8, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
23
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶ 3.a.): On October 30, 2013, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he 
responded to a question pertaining to his police record. The question in Section 22 – 
Police Record asked if, in the last seven years, he had been charged, convicted, or 
sentenced of a crime in any court, including charges, convictions or sentences in any 
federal, state, local, military, or non-US court. Applicant answered “no” to the question.24 
He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the response to that question was, in fact, false. Applicant 
had been charged three years earlier with violations of Articles 107, 121, 123, and 132, 
UCMJ; and convicted by a Special Court-Martial of two violations of Article 121, UCMJ. 
Applicant was sentenced to 85 days confinement, reduction from E-7 to E-5, ordered to 
forfeit $1,500, and fined $3,800. Applicant admitted falsifying his response25 and offered 
no explanation for his falsification.  
 
 (SOR ¶ 3.b.): In that same e-QIP, Applicant responded to questions pertaining to 
his financial record. The questions in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency 
Involving Routine Accounts) asked if, in the past seven years, he had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card suspended, charged 
off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; been over 120 days delinquent on any debt 
not previously entered; and if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. 
Applicant answered “no” to those questions.26 He certified that the response was “true, 
complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to 
those questions was, in fact, false for Applicant had concealed multiple accounts that 
were either placed for collection, charged off, or were over 120 days delinquent. 
Applicant admitted falsifying his response27 and offered no explanation for his 
falsification. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”28 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
24
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 28. 
 
25
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
26
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 32. 
 
27
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
28
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”29   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”30 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.31  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”32 
                                                          
29
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
30
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
31
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
32
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”33 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. In addition, “deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust” 
is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 19(d).  Applicant’s criminal conduct while working 
in the disbursing office aboard his naval ship clearly constituted embezzlement, 
employee theft, and intentional financial breaches of trust. The problems with his 
finances purportedly left him with insufficient funds to continue making his routine 
monthly payments and various accounts became delinquent, were placed for collection, 
or charged off.  AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(d) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
33
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”34  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. The illness of Applicant’s 
brother did not justify Applicant’s criminal actions while serving in the disbursing office 
aboard his naval ship, for such actions were not beyond Applicant’s control. Instead, his 
criminal conduct resulted in a substantial loss of income because of the reduction in 
pay, and the payment of fines and forfeitures. As of December 2013, Applicant had not 
received financial counseling nor sought any debt consolidation services. There is no 
evidence that he ever contacted his creditors in an effort to resolve his debts. He 
essentially ignored them. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be 
because he did not submit a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly 
income, his monthly household or debt expenses, or whether or not he has any funds 
remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. Applicant offered 
no evidence to indicate that his financial problems are now under control, and based on 
his comments in his Answer to the SOR, that he was in the process of submitting a 
bankruptcy; it appears that his financial problems are not under control. Applicant has 
not acted responsibly by failing to address his delinquent accounts and by making little, 
if any, efforts of working with his creditors.35 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast substantial doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.36 
 
                                                          
34
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
35
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
36
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. A security concern may be raised under AG ¶ 31(c), when there is an 
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” As noted above, Applicant’s 
criminal conduct occurred from mid-2009 until August 2010. Applicant was charged with 
making false official statements, in violation of Article 107, UCMJ; two counts of larceny, 
in violation of Article 121, UCMJ; forgery, in violation of Article 123, UCMJ; and 
committing fraud against the United States, in violation of Article 132. Applicant was 
tried by a Special Court-Martial, and as part of a pretrial plea agreement, he pled guilty 
to the two larceny charges, with the remaining charges dismissed. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
31(c) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct, but none of those conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. The 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant’s omissions 
and concealments in his responses to inquiries pertaining to his criminal conduct and 
financial record in his 2013 e-QIP provide sufficient evidence to examine if Applicant’s 
answers and comments were deliberate falsifications pertaining to critical information, 
 
10 
                                      
 
as alleged in the SOR. Applicant admitted falsifying his responses and offered no 
explanations for his falsifications. AG ¶ 16(a) has been established.37  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of those conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.38   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Until he chose 
to violate his fiduciary responsibilities in the disbursing office aboard his naval ship, 
Applicant had apparently been an outstanding sailor who had risen to the grade of chief 
petty officer. He was also a caring brother. He has been working part-time in addition to 
his full-time job.  
  
                                                          
37
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
38
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
In 2010, Applicant was charged with various violations of the UCMJ, and convicted by a 
Special Court-Martial of two violations of Article 121, UCMJ. Applicant was sentenced to 
85 days confinement, reduction from E-7 to E-5, ordered to forfeit $1,500, and fined 
$3,800. His egregious conduct diminishes his honorable discharge. When asked about 
any such police record, he lied, and subsequently admitted falsifying his response on 
his e-QIP. He offered no explanation for his falsification. Applicant also had substantial 
delinquent debts, totaling approximately $31,546 that had been placed for collection or 
charged off, as reflected by a November 2013 credit report. Yet, when asked on the 
same e-QIP about his financial record, Applicant again lied, and subsequently admitted 
falsifying his response. He offered no explanation for this falsification. Applicant’s failure 
to contact his creditors or arrange payment plans reflects traits which raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. It is not known what Applicant’s financial 
resources may be, or if he has any funds remaining at the end of each month for 
discretionary use or savings. There are some indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control, and he may simply file for bankruptcy to avoid paying 
his delinquent debts. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances confronting him cast 
substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his debts. His criminal conduct and 
personal conduct were egregious and relatively recent. Overall, the evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial considerations, criminal conduct, and 
personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
