 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01736 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding personal conduct and 
alcohol consumption. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 17, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On June 9, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (e-QIP), dated July 17, 2013. 
 
2 
                                      
 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF could not make an affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, dated and notarized on July 9, 2014,2 Applicant responded to the 
SOR allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on September 4, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity, within 
a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on September 10, 
2014, but as of October 30, 2014, he had not submitted any further documents or other 
information. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to personal conduct and alcohol consumption in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a.-1.c., 1.g.- 
1.m., and 2.a.). He admitted portions and denied portions of two allegations (¶¶ 1.d. and 
1.f.) and denied the one remaining allegation (¶ 1.e.). Applicant’s admissions and other 
comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a general maintenance worker since June 2011. He was unemployed from 
March 2009 until September 2009, and from August 2010 until June 2011.3 Applicant 
served in an enlisted capacity with the U.S. Army from November 2005 until March 
2009.4 He was administratively discharged under honorable conditions with a general 
discharge certificate due to misconduct.5 After attending high school for several years, 
he received a General Educational Development (GED) diploma in March 2004.6 
Applicant was married in November 2008 and divorced in December 2010.7 
                                                          
2
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated July 9, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 11-12, 15-16; Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated August 13, 2013), at 3. 
 
4
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 12-13. 
 
5
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 13, 15-16. It appears that Applicant was processed under Army Regulation (AR) 
635-200, Para. 14-12c: “Soldiers are subject to action per this section for the following: . . . Commission of a serious 
military or civil offense, if the specific circumstances of the offense warrant separation and a punitive discharge is, or 
would be, authorized for the same or a closely related offense under the MCM.” See, AR 635-200, Active Duty 
Enlisted Administrative Separations (June 6, 2005), as revised, Para. 14-12c.  
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
3 
                                      
 
 
Personal Conduct & Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant enjoyed his alcohol. He started drinking alcohol when he was 16 years 
old when he took his father’s beer and hiked out into the woods to consume three beers 
at a time. At times, he would purchase beer or get someone to purchase it for him. He 
was eventually caught by his father. At the age of 19, Applicant consumed beer to 
excess and became intoxicated. Early during his enlistment, Applicant and some 
companions would purchase a 12-pack of beer every Saturday. After consuming his 
share, Applicant would get drunk and fall asleep. After he returned from a deployment in 
June 2008, Applicant started consuming ten beers per day, every day. At times, he 
would switch to rum and drink one-half of a fifth per day. He estimated it might take six 
shots of rum for him to become intoxicated. Applicant consumed up to eight shots of 
rum at least three or four times per week. After his discharge, Applicant returned to 
beer, drinking 12 beers at a time. In December 2012, after consuming 12 beers, he 
ended up in the hospital and was diagnosed with ulcers and ulcerative colitis. He was 
advised not to consume alcohol in the future. Applicant contends he has abstained 
since that time.8  
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of inappropriate and criminal conduct, 
characterized for the purposes of his security clearance review as personal conduct and 
alcohol consumption, commencing in 2005, and it has continued through at least July 
2013. His incidents were varied: alcohol-related, drug-related, driving violations, purely 
criminal in nature, or deliberate falsifications on a personnel security questionnaire. The 
SOR alleged 13 such incidents. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): During the period from about December 19, 2005 to January 4, 
2006, while on active duty with the U.S. Army, Applicant wrongfully used marijuana 
(less than 30 grams), in violation of Article 112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ). His actions were revealed and confirmed when he tested positive after a 
random urinalysis test.9 He was administered nonjudicial punishment under Article 15, 
UCMJ, and ordered to forfeit $589 per month for two months.10  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and 2.a.): On December 9, 2006, Applicant was observed driving 
71 miles-per-hour (MPH) in a 45 MPH zone. Upon being stopped by the police, he 
emitted a strong odor of alcohol. He failed the field sobriety tests that were administered 
and he was arrested. His breathalyzer test registered .084.11 Applicant was charged 
with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), a misdemeanor, and speeding. The 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8
 Item 5, supra note 3, at 4-5. 
 
9
 Item 8 (Incident History, dated July 10, 2009). 
 
10
 Item 7 (Record of Proceedings Under Article 15, UCMJ, dated February 7, 2006); Item 7 (Commander’s 
Report of Disciplinary or Administrative Action, dated March 20, 2006); Item 6 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
Identification Record, dated July 30, 2013), at 3; Item 3, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
11
 Item 7 (Military Police Report, dated December 10, 2006), at 5. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
court reduced the DUI to reckless driving, for which Applicant was found guilty and fined 
$918. He was also found guilty of speeding and fined $702.12 
  
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 2.a.): On or about October 29, 2008, Applicant was ordered by 
his first sergeant “not to possess or have any alcohol in your room until you completed 
ASAP (Army Substance Abuse Program)” or words to that effect.13 Notwithstanding that 
order, Applicant kept alcohol in his barracks room, and it was discovered there during 
an inspection.14 On November 10, 2008, Applicant was observed on his military post 
driving at a high rate of speed without his headlights on. Upon being stopped by the 
police, he emitted a strong odor of alcohol. He failed the field sobriety tests that were 
administered to him and he was arrested. His breathalyzer test registered .169.15  
Applicant was charged with DUI, failure to illuminate, no license in possession, and 
speeding. It is unclear as to whether or not those charges were acted upon since his 
commander advised Applicant that he was considering charging him with willfully 
disobeying a lawful order of a noncommissioned officer in violation of Article 91, UCMJ. 
Applicant was administered nonjudicial punishment under Article 15, UCMJ, and 
sentenced to forfeit $755 per month for two months, reduced in grade, given extra duty 
for 45 days, and restricted for 45 days (suspended).16 Although the SOR alleged that 
Applicant was also command-directed to attend ASAP, an allegation that Applicant 
denied,17 other than the alleged comment of the noncommissioned officer that was 
purportedly made on or about October 29, 2008 – before the incident or nonjudicial 
punishment – there is no evidence to support that portion of the allegation. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.f., 1.g., and 2.a.): Applicant self-enrolled into the ASAP in September 
or October 2008 – before his November 10, 2008 incident – because he finally realized 
he had a problem.18 During the period commencing in October or November 2008 until 
February or March 2009, Applicant attended out-patient group counseling every 
Wednesday. He stated the “initial complaint or condition was considered alcoholism,”19 
and admitted he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence.20 In addition, although the 
SOR alleged that Applicant was treated for, and diagnosed with, cannabis dependency, 
                                                          
12
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 5; Item 7 (Commander’s Report of Disciplinary or Administrative Action, dated 
January 24, 2007; Item 3, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
13
 Item 7 (Record of Proceedings Under Article 15, UCMJ, dated December 19, 2008). 
 
14
 Item 5, supra note 3, at 6. 
 
15
 Item 7 (Military Police Report, dated November 11, 2008), at 5. 
 
16
 Item 7, supra note 13; Item 7 (Commander’s Report of Disciplinary or Administrative Action, dated 
December 30, 2008).  
 
17
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 1. See also Item 8, supra note 9, wherein there is no mention of such an order. 
 
18
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
19
 Item 5, supra note 3, at 6. 
 
20
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
an allegation that Applicant denied,21 there is no evidence to support that portion of the 
allegation. Applicant admitted that he continued to consume alcohol and that he did not 
successfully complete the ASAP.22  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 2.a.): The SOR alleged that on January 13, 2009, Applicant 
was arrested and charged with DUI. Applicant denied the allegation.23 There is no 
evidence to support the allegation.24 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 2.a.): As noted above, in March 2009, Applicant was 
administratively discharged under honorable conditions with a general discharge 
certificate due to misconduct.25 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): On some unspecified date in 2011, Applicant was cited for (1) 
passing in a no-passing zone; and (2) speeding 35 MPH in a 25 MPH zone. He was 
fined $154 for the first charge, $372 for the second charge, and placed on probation for 
12 months because he did not has sufficient funds to pay the entire fine at one time.26 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.): In January 2013, after eating dinner with his girlfriend, as 
they were leaving the restaurant, Applicant’s girlfriend stole a small statue from the front 
of the restaurant and placed it in Applicant’s truck. Applicant was standing next to her 
when she took the item, but did not stop her from doing so. A security camera recorded 
Applicant’s license number, and when the police called him in to talk, the statue was still 
in his truck. While they were not arrested, they were both charged with theft by taking, a 
misdemeanor.27 Applicant and his girlfriend appeared in court, pled guilty, and they 
were sentenced to 50 hours of community service, fined $44 per month for four months, 
and probation until May 2014.28 The statue was returned to the restaurant.29 Applicant 
indicated his girlfriend was intoxicated when she stole the statue, but that since he has 
been abstinent since December 2008, he was not. Nevertheless, they were both 
ordered to undergo a drug and alcohol assessment, which Applicant supposedly 
passed.30 While the SOR alleged alcohol involvement, in light of Applicant’s denial and 
                                                          
21
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
22
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
23
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
24
 It appears that the allegation was erroneously derived from Item 8 wherein there was a reference to the 
November 10, 2008 incident with a final status listed as January 13, 2009. 
 
25
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 1; Item 5, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
26
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
27
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 6. 
 
28
 Item 5, supra note 3, at 8-9. 
 
29
 Item 5, supra note 3, at 8. 
 
30
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
explanation, there is no evidence to support that the involvement can be attributed to 
Applicant. 
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.j. through 1.m.): On July 17, 2013, when Applicant completed his e-   
QIP, he responded to certain questions pertaining to his police record. The questions in 
Section 22 asked if, in the last seven years, he had been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against him; he had been arrested by 
any police officer or other type of law enforcement official; or been or is currently on 
probation or parole; and if he had EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol 
or drugs. [emphasis in original] Applicant answered “no” to all of the questions.31 He 
certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false. As 
noted above, Applicant had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in 
court in criminal proceedings against him; had been arrested on several occasions; had 
been on probation; and had been charged with offenses involving alcohol and drugs. 
Although he initially explained to the investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) that he must have misread the questions or simply did not 
remember the incidents at the time he completed the e-QIP,32 he subsequently admitted 
falsifying his responses.33   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”34 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”35   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
31
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 26-27. 
 
32
 Item 5, supra note 3, at 4, 8-9. 
 
33
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
34
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
35
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”36 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.37  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”38 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
                                                          
36
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
37
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
38
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
39
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is a  
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 16(d), security concerns may be raised if there is 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. . . .  
 
 Also, it is also potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(e) if there is 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
Applicant served with the U.S. Army from November 2005 until March 2009, and 
on numerous occasions during that period, as well as thereafter, he committed a variety 
of wrongful and illegal acts, resulting in nonjudicial punishment and civilian court 
 
9 
                                      
 
actions. He wrongfully used marijuana. He was frequently intoxicated. Applicant was 
finally administratively discharged under honorable conditions with a general discharge 
certificate due to his misconduct. Repeated punishment did not serve as a deterrent, for 
he was subsequently arrested on numerous occasions. When questioned regarding his 
police history, he lied and tried to conceal the substantial negative issues from his past. 
Applicant certified that his responses to questions were “true, complete, and correct to 
the best of [his] knowledge and belief,” but he deliberately falsified responses and 
concealed critical information in his security clearance application in 2013. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 
16(d), and 16(e) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of them apply. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” may apply under 
AG ¶ 22(c).  Similarly, a “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence” 
is of security significance under AG ¶ 22(d). Additionally, an “evaluation of alcohol 
abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member 
of a recognized alcohol treatment program” is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 22(e). 
AG ¶ 22(a) has been established by Applicant’s DUI convictions and nonjudicial 
punishment actions; and AG ¶ 22(c) has been established, because Applicant 
repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication. AG ¶¶ 22(d) and 22(e) have 
not been established as the record is silent regarding who purportedly made the 
diagnosis or evaluation of alcohol dependence, and that evidence is crucial to 
establishing the bona fides of the individual who made the diagnosis or evaluation.  
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” In addition, when “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or 
 
10 
                                      
 
issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if 
an alcohol abuser)”, AG ¶ 23(b) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) minimally applies and AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. Although Applicant 
finally conceded that he had an alcohol problem in October 2008, and acknowledged 
that he needs to stay away from alcohol, the facts seem to contradict Applicant’s 
statements.  Applicant initially contended that he has been abstinent since December 
2008, yet he acknowledged consuming 12 beers in December 2012, when he ended up 
in the hospital. Considering Applicant’s lack of candor in completing his e-QIP in 2013, 
without more, his self-reported period of abstinence is difficult to determine.  
 
After careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, I conclude Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption after his alcohol-
related convictions; his administrative discharge because of his misconduct, due in part 
to his alcohol consumption; after he had participated in ASAP; his failure to successfully 
complete ASAP; as well as his lack of candor, all indicate he is either unwilling or 
unable to curtail his alcohol consumption. The uncertainty of Applicant’s purported 
period of abstinence further complicates the issue.  Applicant’s conduct demonstrates a 
lack of judgment and/or a failure to control impulses which is inconsistent with the 
holder of a security clearance. While his abstinence, if there actually is one, should be 
viewed favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue his abstinence, it is simply 
too soon after his most recent consumption of alcohol to conclude that his alcohol 
problem has been put behind him and will not recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
 
11 
                                      
 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.40       
There is very little evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His military 
service was such that he was was administratively discharged under honorable 
conditions with a general discharge certificate due to misconduct. There are no positive 
characterizations as to his reputation for honesty, integrity, truthfulness or good work 
performance. Instead, he simply avers that he has been abstinent. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has an extensive history of inappropriate and criminal conduct, characterized 
for the purposes of his security clearance review as personal conduct and alcohol 
consumption. In July 2013, he deliberately falsified material facts and concealed the 
true facts about his police record. Applicant exhibited a cavalier attitude regarding 
compliance with rules, regulations, and the law, as well as for truthfulness. Applicant’s 
actions indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations, all of which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
       
                                                          
40
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
