                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01715
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
January 22, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated September 28, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On August 11, 2014, the
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guidelines H and G for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 28, 2014, and he requested a
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge.  This
case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 21, 2014, and set for
hearing on December 3, 2014.  At the hearing the Government presented two exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2.  The Applicant presented seven exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G.  He also testified on his own behalf.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on December 15, 2014.  Based upon a review
2
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 30 years old and single.  He has a Bachelor’s Degree in Computer
Science and is employed by a defense contractor as a Software Engineer.  He is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted to each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.) 
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use and addiction from 2009 until April
2013.  He has used a variety of illegal drugs, including marijuana and ecstacy;
painkillers, hydrocodone and oxycodone; and the anxiety drug, xanax, without a
prescription.  He became addicted to both the pain killers and the anxiety drug he used
without prescriptions.  Since September 2013, Applicant has been working for his
current employer.  
He testified that he began using marijuana in 2009 at the age of 25 on a daily
basis.  He explained that he had a stressful job and was depressed about leaving
college and all of his friends.  From 2009 until March 2013 Applicant usually used
marijuana every evening.  He enjoyed the way it made him feel and it helped him relax.
He normally purchased about an eighth of an ounce of marijuana once every two
weeks, spending $50 on each purchase for his own use.        
From June 2009 to August 2012 Applicant was using the painkillers,
hydrocodone and oxycodone, three times a day, to deal with chest pain he experienced
from complications with acid reflux.  Applicant purchased the prescription drugs from a
friend, and over the course of his use, he spent tens of thousand of dollars on the drug.
(Tr. p. 49.)     
From January 2011, to April 2013 Applicant was also using the anxiety drug,
xanax to help him sleep at night.  He also purchased this drug from a friend.  
By February 2012 Applicant had became addicted to the pain killers and was
consuming alcohol to excess.  He knew that he was building up a tolerance to the pain
killers.  He realized that the drugs were not only expensive but they were beginning to
threaten his health and he needed to stop using them.  By early 2012 he started to
make changes.  In May 2012 he met with his doctor who referred him to a psychologist
who placed him on medication to help him to withdraw from his illegal drug addition.  At
that time, Applicant was diagnosed with Opiate Dependence, Marijuana Abuse, and
Alcohol Dependence, in Remission.  At that time, Applicant was placed on another drug
3
Suboxone, a partial opiate, to help manage his Opiate Dependence.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits A and B.)
In early 2013 Applicant had problems staying awake at work due, in part, to his
drug usage and excessive alcohol consumption.  In January 2013 his employer gave
him a written reprimand and suspended him for one day after he was found asleep on
the job.  In March 2013 Applicant was terminated by mutual agreement after he was
found sleeping on the job again.  
In April 2013 Applicant’s addiction to xanax caused him to obtain inpatient
treatment for a condition diagnosed as Benzodiazepine Dependence and Opiate
Dependence.  He was referred to an outpatient program from April 2013 to June 2013
for a condition diagnosed as Benzodiazepine Dependence, Opiate Dependence, Major
Depressive Disorder-Recurrent, Mild, and Generalized Anxiety Disorder. 
Applicant explained that for the past twenty months, he has been completely
drug free.  He has tried to fill his life with positive things to avoid the temptation of drugs
and excessive alcohol abuse.  He now goes to church and bible study on a regular
basis.  He walks four miles a day, and goes to yoga.  He uses herbs and supplements
which have been helpful, and he sees a medical massage therapist to help him sleep.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
Applicant admitted to each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse
that includes a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, followed by continued alcohol
consumption.  He claims that he has been drug free for the past twenty months, but he
continues to consume alcohol.  
Applicant explained that when he turned 21 years old, alcohol consumption
became a regular habit.  He began by drinking about three or four beers each time.  As
he grew a tolerance to the alcohol, he increased the amount he would consume.  He
believes that from late 2010 until May 2012 he drank excessively.  He enjoys
consuming alcohol, and testified that he continues to drink and usually consumes one or
two glasses of wine in the evenings about two to four times a week.  (Tr. p. 52.) He has
never considered himself an alcoholic.  There have been times that Applicant has tried
to stop drinking.  For example, in May 2012, Applicant quit drinking for a short period
while transitioning to Suboxone.  He again stopped consuming alcohol from April or May
2013 to November 2013.  He testified that just three days before the hearing in this
matter he consumed alcohol.    
Applicant’s alcohol consumption also contributed to his problems on the job in
December 2012, or January 2013, when he began falling asleep at work.  At the time,
he was mixing alcohol with his prescription medication.  Applicant specfically asked his
physician if he could consume alcohol while taking the Suboxone, and was told that it
4
was not recommended.  (Tr. p. 67.)  As discussed above, Applicant was warned by his
employer and then eventually terminated from his employment for this conduct.
A letter from a coworker of the Applicant indicates that Applicant is reliable,
talented, and trustworthy on the job.  He is considered mature, has sound judgment,
and completes his tasks on time and within budget.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
25.(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22.(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent; sand
5
22.(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
6
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and alcohol abuse demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H) and alcohol abuse (Guideline G).  The
totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on
the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I
conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence
in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's
case under Guidelines H and G of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that Applicant’s history of illegal drug use and excessive
alcohol consumption caused him not only physical problems but problems on his job
that resulted in him being terminated.  His abuse of prescription painkillers without a
prescription, over a sustained period of time, caused him to develop a serious
addiction.  All along he knew that his drug use was wrong, illegal, and against DoD
policy.  Applicant’s conduct shows immaturity and raises serious security concerns
about his reliability and trustworthiness.  Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement,
Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia, and 25.d. diagnosis by a duly qualified medical
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug
dependence apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
Furthermore, Applicant was also diagnosed with alcohol dependence.  Under
Guideline H, Alcohol Consumption, Disqualifying Conditions 22.(c) habitual or binge
7
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, and 22.(d)
diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist,
or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  Applicant continues to drink despite the fact that it is not
recommended by his physician.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.  
Applicant claims that he has been drug-free for twenty months.  He is
commended for his recent decision to live a drug-free lifestyle.  Despite this, he
continues to consume alcohol, although admittedly more limited than before.  However,
given the fact that he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence, he should not consume
alcohol at all, and takes the big risk of easily falling back into his old habits.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 30 years old, but
conducts himself more like a young, immature, inexperienced, recent college graduate
who has recently been experimenting with illegal drugs and abusing alcohol.  This is
puzzling.  Applicant does not demonstrate the level of maturity, responsibility or the
characteristics expected of an employee who works for the defense industry and
wants access to classified information.  At this point, although Applicant has been drug
free for twenty months, he continues to consume alcohol.  Given the extensive nature
of his addictions, to both drugs and alcohol, he must remain completely sober and drug
free for a substantial period of time to guarantee the Government that he will not return
to his old habits.  Applicant’s illegal conduct is too recent and a clear indicator of poor
judgment and unreliability that preclude him from security clearance eligibility at this
time.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, this
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.       
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.
8
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
     
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
