 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-00053 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding handling protected 
information and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2002, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted a 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On February 18, 2008, Applicant submitted 
another Security Clearance Application (2nd SF 86).2 On May 3, 2013, he submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.3 On March 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (SF 86, dated May 22 18, 2002). 
 
2
 Item 4 (SF 86, dated February 18, 2008). 
 
3
 Item 3 (e-QIP), dated May 3, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline K (Handling 
Protected Information) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why 
the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement notarized April 15, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.4 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
prepared by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The FORM was 
provided to Applicant on November 5, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity, within 
a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on November 14, 
2014. Applicant responded to the FORM, and on December 11, 2014, he submitted 
additional documentation. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
pertaining to handling protected information (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). He failed to address 
the allegation pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain the top secret security clearance that he was initially granted in September 1984.5 
In September 2003, He was also granted access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI) at that time. That SCI access was periodically renewed,6 but it is not 
known if he still has such access. He has been employed by the same defense 
contractor as a research assistant since February 2000,7 and previously worked for 
another federal contractor for 16 years. He has never served with the United States 
military.8  
                                                          
4
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR). 
 
5
 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated August 23, 2013), at 3; Item 5, supra note 1, at 33; Item 4, supra 
note 2, at 7; Item 3, supra note 3, at 29-30. 
 
6
 Item 6, supra note 5, at 3; Item 4, supra note 2, at 7. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 3, at 12. 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 3, at 14. 
 
3 
                                      
 
A 1968 high school graduate,9 Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 1972 
and master’s degrees in 1975 and 1990.10 Applicant was married in 1975, and he and 
his wife have two adult children: a daughter (born in 1981) and a son (born in 1984).11  
 
Handling Protected Information & Personal Conduct 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 2.a.): In February 2003, after working within a closed area 
containing an outer room and an inner room (containing closed storage of classified 
material), Applicant fully engaged the security measures of the inner room, but failed to 
engage all of the supplemental protection security measures of the outer room. The 
alarm was activated, but he failed to engage the locking mechanism. An investigation 
conducted by the facility security officer (FSO) concluded that there was no compromise 
or attempted compromise of classified material because one of the supplemental 
protection security measures was functional and there were no signs of attempted entry 
or missing items.12 While Applicant admitted that the incident constituted a “security 
violation,”13 in fact, under DOD 5220.22-M-Sup, National Industrial Security Program 
Operating Manual Supplement (February 1995), it should have been classified as a 
“security infraction.”14  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 2.a.): Seven years later, in October 2010, after working within 
the same closed area with a cleared colleague, Applicant failed to lock the security 
container assigned to him within the inner room and failed to engage the locking 
mechanism  of the inner room. He did, however, activate the alarm of the inner room, as 
well as engage all of the supplemental protection security measures of the outer room. 
An investigation conducted by the FSO concluded that there was no compromise or 
attempted compromise of classified material because the supplemental protection 
security measures of the outer room were functional and there were no signs of 
attempted entry or missing items.15 The incident should have been classified as a 
“security infraction.”  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 2.a.): In February 2011, while working in the same outer room, 
Applicant replaced a 5-disc compact disc (CD) player used to generate “white noise” 
with a single disc player. He removed the five unclassified CDs contained in the CD 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9
 Item 3, supra note 3, at 9-10. 
 
10
 Item 3, supra note 3, at 10-11. 
 
11
 Item 3, supra note 3, at 22-23. 
 
12
 Item 2, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
13
 Item 2, supra note 4, at 3. “A security violation is any incident that involves the loss, compromise, or 
suspected compromise of classified information.” DOD 5220.22-M-Sup, § 1-301.a. (1). 
 
14
 “A security infraction is any other incident that is not in the best interest of security that does not involve 
the loss, compromise, or suspected compromise of classified information.” DOD 5220.22-M-Sup, § 1-301.a. (2). 
 
15
 Letter from FSO, dated October 26, 2010, attached to Item 2. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
player and placed the remaining four CDs on the shelf adjacent to the disc player. Each 
of the CDs was already in the closed area and labeled in compliance with the 
instructions previously furnished. In that area, a green mark indicated “unclassified.” 
The entire word was not used because it was office policy and the closed area network 
plan not to do so. The policy and plan eventually evolved into a lab-wide plan which 
apparently mandated the use of the entire word. The green markings on the CDs should 
have been modified by someone, not identified, but they were not. During a normal 
security patrol, the guard noticed the CDs and confiscated them. An investigation 
conducted by the FSO concluded that there was no compromise or attempted 
compromise of classified material because the supplemental protection security 
measures of the outer room were functional and there were no signs of attempted entry 
or missing items.16 The incident was classified as a “minor incident” by the FSO, and 
Applicant was issued a verbal warning.17 
  
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.): In May 2012, after working within the same inner room, 
Applicant engaged the locking mechanism of the room, but failed to activate the alarm 
of the room. While the outer room was no longer a closed area, he did engage all of the 
supplemental protection security measures of the outer room. An investigation 
conducted by the FSO concluded that there was no compromise or attempted 
compromise of classified material because the supplemental protection security 
measures of the outer room were functional and there were no signs of attempted entry 
or missing items.18 Applicant received a written notification for the incident and advised 
to review and follow all the procedural steps on the closed area instruction sheet.19 The 
incident should have been classified as a “security infraction.” Following the May 2012 
incident, Applicant was advised by the FSO that if any future issues such as the latest 
one should occur, and if they suggest a pattern of recklessness with security 
requirements or deliberate disregard, the FSO would be required to file an adverse 
action report to the Defense Security Service pursuant to § 1-304, DOD 5220.22-M, 
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (February 2006) (NISPOM). 
 
 The Security Manager for SCI and Special Programs noted that since Applicant’s 
indoctrination for SCI in 2006, Applicant attended yearly SCI security refresher training, 
and he has not received any written warnings for practices dangerous to security or 
violations within the SCIF areas.20 The FSO noted that Applicant “expressed his 
contrition for the incidents and made tangible efforts to avoid repeating the lapses 
involved by increasing his level of vigilance.”21 Applicant has acknowledged that he was 
careless when he failed to complete the various security protocols that had been 
                                                          
16
 Letter from FSO, dated October 26, 2010, attached to Item 2; Security Incident Report, dated February 7, 
2011, attached to Item 2. 
 
17
 Letter from FSO, dated April 13, 2014, at 1, attached to Item 2; Security Incident Report, supra note 16. 
 
18
 Letter from FSO, dated May 11, 2012, attached to Item 2. 
 
19
 Letter from FSO, supra note 18. 
 
20
 Letter from Security Manager for SCI and Special Programs, dated April 3, 2014, attached to Item 2. 
 
21
 Letter from FSO, supra note 17, at 2. 
 
5 
                                      
 
established, and he has since taken a variety of steps to insure that his inadvertent 
failures do not recur. He has reminders pop up on his computer screen at work; he 
placed a sign over the locking mechanism of the doors; and he placed a checklist on the 
inner room door on which he notes the time opened, time closed, alarm activated, and 
door locked.22 
 
Character References 
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor, who has known and worked with Applicant for 
over 25 years, and is the individual who initially hired him, is highly supportive of 
Applicant’s application. He has no reservations regarding Applicant’s commitment to 
support the rules and regulations for protecting classified information.23 The FSO has 
known Applicant for about four years, and he has referred to Applicant as having 
distinguished himself as an honest and hardworking researcher who understands the 
importance of security policies and procedures to protect classified material with which 
he is entrusted. The FSO cited Applicant’s integrity and candor as being exemplified by 
his listing more security incidents in his e-QIP than were actually required. Only two of 
the incidents should have been listed, neither of which risked the compromise of 
classified material.24 The FSO concluded that neither incident resulted from deliberate 
disregard, gross negligence or a pattern of negligence under the NISPOM.25  The FSO 
recommends, without reservation, that Applicant retain his security clearance.26  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
22
 Item 6, supra note 5, at 2; Item 2, supra note 4, a t3-4. 
 
23
 Character Reference, dated April 14, 2014, attached to Item 2. 
 
24
 Letter from FSO, supra note 17, at 1-2. 
 
25
 Letter from FSO, supra note 17, at 2. 
 
26
 Letter from FSO, supra note 17, at 2. 
 
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
                                                          
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
7 
                                      
 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33:       
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
34(g) “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive 
information” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, “negligence or lax security habits 
that persist despite counseling by management” may raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 34(h). Applicant’s employer determined that his actions in 2003, 2010, 2011, and 
2012, violated various security policies and procedures. Most of those incidents 
constituted “security infractions,” and none of them constituted “security violations” 
under the NISPOM Supplement. Nevertheless, AG ¶¶ 34(g) and 34(h) have been 
established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from handling protected information. Under AG ¶ 35(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the 
behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that 
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 35(b) may apply if “the individual 
responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now demonstrates 
a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” Applicant has had 
four security incidents in nine years in the 30-year period during which he has held a top 
secret security clearance. Three of the security infractions involved his failure to activate 
or engage all of the supplemental protection security measures available in the security 
system. One incident involved unclassified CDs that were not properly marked as such. 
 
 After conducting security investigations for each of the cited incidents, the FSO 
concluded that there was no compromise or attempted compromise of classified 
material because most of the supplemental protection security measures were engaged 
or activated and functional, and there were no signs of attempted entry or missing 
items. After disregarding the continuing significance of the incidents of 2003 and 2011, 
the FSO also concluded that neither of the remaining incidents resulted from deliberate 
 
8 
                                      
 
disregard, gross negligence or a pattern of negligence under the NISPOM. I found 
Applicant’s evidence, including his statements and those of the FSO and the Security 
Manager for SCI and Special Programs, to be consistent and credible.  
The most recent security incident – a security infraction – when Applicant 
engaged the locking mechanism of the inner room, but failed to activate the alarm of 
that room, occurred in May 2012, approximately two and one-half years before the date 
of the hearing. Applicant attended yearly SCI security refresher training, and he has not 
received any written warnings for practices dangerous to security or violations within the 
SCIF areas. 
Furthermore, Applicant expressed his contrition for the incidents and made 
tangible efforts to avoid repeating the lapses involved by increasing his level of 
vigilance. Applicant has acknowledged that he was careless and has taken a variety of 
steps to insure that his inadvertent failures do not recur. While there are these four 
incidents, Applicant has, nevertheless, demonstrated a positive attitude to the discharge 
of his security responsibilities and embraced security consciousness. Considering the 
totality of the evidence, I find that AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply to mitigate the security 
concerns. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(d), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. . . .  
 
 Applicant’s employer determined that Applicant’s actions in 2003, 2010, 2011, 
and 2012, violated various security policies and procedures. That is four security 
incidents in the 30-year period during which he has held a top secret security clearance. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Most of those incidents constituted “security infractions,” and none of them constituted 
“security violations” under the NISPOM Supplement. The FSO concluded that there was 
no deliberate disregard, gross negligence or a pattern of negligence under the NISPOM, 
and recommends, without reservation, that Applicant retain his security clearance. 
Nevertheless, AG ¶ 16(d) has been established. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) 
may apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” Similarly, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply if “the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.”  
 
The FSO noted that Applicant expressed his contrition for the incidents and 
made tangible efforts to avoid repeating the lapses involved by increasing his level of 
vigilance. Applicant acknowledged that he was careless when he failed to complete the 
various security protocols that had been established, and he has taken a variety of 
steps to insure that his inadvertent failures do not recur. A person should not be defined 
by, or held forever accountable for, isolated incidents of poor judgment from the past, 
especially if there is a clear indication of subsequent reform, remorse, or rehabilitation. 
Applicant’s security clearance has been periodically renewed over a 30-year period. He 
has not been involved in another security incident in two and one-half years. AG ¶¶ 
17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) apply. I conclude that Applicant’s actions no longer cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.33 
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s handling of protected 
information and personal conduct. During a nine-year period, in 2003, 2010, 2011, and 
2012, he violated various security policies and procedures.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has held a top secret security clearance, sometimes with access to SCI, for 
30 years. Three of the security infractions involved his failure to activate or engage all of 
the supplemental protection security measures available in the security system. One 
incident involved unclassified CDs that were not properly marked as such. After 
conducting security investigations for each of the incidents, the FSO concluded that 
there was no compromise or attempted compromise of classified material because most 
of the supplemental protection security measures were engaged or activated and 
functional, and there were no signs of attempted entry or missing items. Applicant 
expressed his contrition for the incidents and made tangible efforts to avoid repeating 
the lapses involved by increasing his level of vigilance. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the 
facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated 
and overcome the Government’s case. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9).  
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
                                                          
33
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
