 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-02771  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 January 30, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
  Applicant has a long history of abusing alcohol. His alcohol use has led to four 
DUI charges and three convictions. Despite in-patient treatment for alcohol, Applicant 
has relapsed on several occasions. Although he is currently abstaining from alcohol 
use, the evidence is insufficient to mitigate resulting security concerns. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 24, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On August 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant submitted an undated Answer, and requested that his case be decided 
by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 3.) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 17, 2014. A complete 
copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was provided to 
Applicant on said date, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on November 26, 2014, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). He provided additional information in response to the 
FORM on December 23, 2014 (Reply). He did not state any objections to the 
Government’s Exhibits, (Items 1 through 7). Department Counsel had no objections to 
Applicant’s Reply. Items 1 through 7 and Applicant’s Reply were entered into evidence.1 
DOHA assigned the case to me on January 21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He is divorced and reported no children. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 1977. (Item 4.) He has worked for a Government contractor since 
March 2012. He seeks a clearance in connection with his employment, which requires 
him to regularly access a military base. (Item 3; Reply.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant has been arrested for Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol (DUI) four times between 1996 and 2005, as stated in 
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d. Additionally, it is alleged that he has relapsed after 
treatment for alcohol abuse in 2001 (allegation 1.e), and that he continues to consume 
alcohol despite a diagnosis of alcohol dependence (allegation 1.f). Applicant admitted 
allegations 1.a through 1.c, and 1.e. He denied allegations 1.d and 1.f. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 On January 29, 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI; Fail to Keep 
Right; and Public Drunkenness. Applicant was drinking at a hotel, and left in his vehicle 
to obtain more alcohol. He was stopped by a police officer who observed Applicant’s 
vehicle weaving on the road. Applicant reported that his blood-alcohol content was 
.30%. These charges were later dismissed, after Applicant completed a 16-day inpatient 
detoxification and two years of probation. (Item 3; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
                                                 
1 Applicant did not object to Item 5, an unauthenticated Report of Investigation (ROI), which normally 
would be excluded without authentication under DoD Directive 5220.6 ¶ E3.1.20. Further, he submitted a 
one page entry from the ROI on his own behalf in his Reply. Under the Doctrine of Completeness and 
because Applicant registered no objection to this evidence, Item 5 is admitted into the record in its 
entirety. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 On September 15, 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with misdemeanor 
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) after he “bumped the rear of a Volkswagen.” 
On September 22, 2001, Applicant was arrested again for another DUI; Careless 
Driving; and Operating Motor Vehicle Without Proof of Insurance. He was arrested after 
he hit a recreational vehicle. On October 30, 2001, he pled nolo contendere to the 
September 1, 2001, and September 21, 2001 DUIs, and was found guilty by the court. 
He was sentenced to probation for a year, six months in jail (with credit for 40 days 
served), fined, and had his driver’s license revoked for ten years. He was also required 
to attend DUI classes. (Item 3; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to have committed a fourth DUI offense in November 2005. 
He indicated that the charge was not a new DUI, but a probation violation for the 2001 
DUI offenses because he failed to attend the DUI classes ordered by the court in 2001. 
As a result, his record reflects he was again charged with DUI on November 5, 2005. 
He indicated that he had no driver’s license in 2005 and that he did not drive. However, 
Applicant offered no documentation to support his claim. The state criminal history 
record reflects this as a separate incident. The record contains no disposition for this 
arrest. (Item 3; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant has participated in alcohol treatment twice. He participated in the 16-
day, court-ordered detoxification program after his 1996 DUI. He reported that he was 
diagnosed with alcohol abuse during that program and was told to stop drinking alcohol, 
He maintained sobriety for four years after this treatment. In 2002 he participated in a 
28-day in-patient treatment program. He was again diagnosed with alcohol abuse, and 
advised to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) three-to-four times per week after 
treatment. He indicated he complied with that recommendation and has an AA sponsor. 
He stated that he has participated in the AA 12-step program. (Item 5; Reply.) 
 
 During his subject interview Applicant discussed his drinking habits. He admitted 
that he is a recovering alcoholic, but has had relapses during his recovery. When he 
consumes alcohol, he drinks a pint of Jim Beam, alone. He reported he relapsed six 
weeks prior to the subject interview on March 18, 2013. His relapse caused him to be 
moved from a less restrictive sober-living center to a more restrictive residence. Prior to 
that relapse, he had been sober for a year. His longest period of sobriety was six years. 
He intends to remain abstinent in the future. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant has resided in a sober-living center since February 2, 2012. He is 
considered to be in “good standing” and to have “exhibited good, moral character.” 
(Reply.) He has also been recognized by his employer for his “dedication to customer 
service and continued hard work.” (Item 3.) He is subject to random drug and alcohol 
screening at the sober-living center, and has never failed a test. He does not currently 
consume alcoholic beverages. (Reply.)  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The conditions at issue based on Applicant’s conduct are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional . . . of alcohol abuse or 
alcohol dependence; and  
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of 
an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of abusing alcohol beginning in 1996. His alcohol 
abuse has resulted in four DUI charges and three convictions. He habitually consumes 
up to a pint of alcohol per day, when he starts to drink. He reported he has been 
diagnosed with alcohol abuse while in detox programs. Despite receiving treatment for 
alcohol abuse and professional recommendations to avoid further alcohol use, he has 
relapsed on numerous occasions. The above disqualifying conditions fully apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
 
 
6 
 
 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use 
(if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or 
treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is 
making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of frequent alcohol abuse, leading to a series of 
criminal charges. He has abstained from alcohol during extended periods, including for 
six years. He asserted that he is sober but failed to document the date of his sobriety. 
Given his long history of abusing alcohol, not enough time has passed to determine that 
Applicant will be successful in his efforts to remain sober. Hence, I cannot hold that 
recurrence is unlikely or that doubts concerning his judgment and reliability are 
resolved. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant acknowledged he is an alcoholic and has taken action to overcome his 
alcohol addiction by living in a sober-living center and joining AA. However, he failed to 
document his current sobriety date. Given the evidence, the longest possible period for 
his current sobriety would be from February 2013 to present. Even if he established that 
he had maintained sobriety during that entire time, not enough time has passed in the 
past two years to establish a pattern of abstinence given his 19-year history of alcohol 
abuse and relapse. While he now has the assistance of the sober-living center, he has 
relapsed while living there in the past. Applicant failed to introduce evidence that he 
participated in any recent extended formal counseling, or that he has received a 
favorable prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional. Accordingly, Applicant 
failed to establish mitigation under the terms of AG ¶¶ 23 (b), 23(c), or 23(d). 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 59-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He has wrestled with alcohol addiction most of his 
adult life. He performs well on the job and is well liked at the sober-living center. He is 
on an encouraging path to recovery. However, at the present time, the risk that he will 
relapse into excessive alcohol consumption still exists. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
