 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00836 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 January 30, 2015 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns that arose out of his 
infrequent recreational drug use from 2004 to August 2013. Applicant has been candid 
with the Department of Defense about his illegal drug involvement, and does not intend 
to use any illegal drugs, including marijuana, in the future. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). On July 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on October 9, 2014 and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 24, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 11, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 9, 
2015. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was 
left open for the receipt of additional documentation. On January 14, 2015, Applicant 
presented four pages of documentation, marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through AE D. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE A though D and they were admitted. The 
record then closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a government contractor. He is engaged 
to be married, and has no children. He graduated from an undergraduate school in 
2011. He was placed on the payroll by his current employer in 2011, but was still 
attending a graduate level program sponsored by his employer. He did not start working 
on contracts for his employer until September 2013. He seeks his first DoD security 
clearance in connection with his first work assignment. (GE 1; Tr. 17-18.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that between November 2004 and August 2013, Applicant 
used marijuana. He also used MDMA in August 2013 and cocaine once, in October 
2012. Applicant was candid about his drug use on his e-QIP, in his Answer, and during 
his testimony. (GE 1; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was recreational in nature and occurred approximately 
six-to-twelve times per year, between November 2004 and August 2013. He started 
using marijuana in high school and continued to use it through college. He never 
purchased marijuana. He used the marijuana with friends, to relax in social settings. 
Applicant stopped using marijuana when he learned that he would be applying for a 
security clearance. He recognized that marijuana use was illegal and that he could not 
engage in illegal activities while holding a security clearance. He testified that he left the 
room any time people around him started smoking marijuana. In his post-hearing 
statement, he further indicated he has disassociated himself from all persons who are 
engaged in illegal drug use “to remove the periodic influence of unlawful behavior from 
[his] life.” (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 16-25, 27-34.) 
 
 Applicant also used cocaine once, and MDMA (Molly) twice, at bachelor parties 
between 2012 and August 2013. Applicant did not purchase these drugs. He did not like 
cocaine and testified he would never use either drug again. He attributes his use of 
cocaine and MDMA to peer pressure because “everyone was using it” at the bachelor 
parties. He has attended other bachelor parties since then, and not used illegal 
substances. In his personal subject interview, he indicated he does not intend to use 
either MDMA or cocaine in the future. (GE 2; Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 Applicant recognized the poor judgment of his past illegal drug use. He signed a 
statement of intent demonstrating he would not abuse any drugs in the future. (AE D.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by the letters he 
entered into evidence. He is considered to be “extremely talented” at his job. He is 
“highly respected as both a person and a professional, by management, colleagues, 
resellers, and customers alike.” He conducts himself “with integrity, honesty, and 
sincerity.” (AE B; AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H. Applicant used marijuana, infrequently from November 
2004 and August 2013. He also experimented with cocaine once in October 2012 and 
MDMA twice, as recently as August 2013. The facts established through the 
Government’s evidence and through Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns 
under both of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
While Applicant’s illegal drug use spanned over a nine-year period, Applicant has 
made a number of significant changes in his life during the past 1.5 years that 
demonstrate his serious commitment to abstinence from illegal substances. He 
recognized that he was wrong to use marijuana, cocaine and MDMA. He ceased using 
all drugs prior to applying for a security clearance. He testified he immediately departs 
any situation where drug use is present. He disassociated himself from drug-using 
friends and associates. Applicant’s drug use occurred largely while he was attending 
 
5 
 
educational institutions. He is now in the work-force and no longer attends school. Thus, 
he has changed his environment. While the Directive does not define what constitutes 
“an appropriate period of abstinence” under AG ¶ 26(b)(3), his candor about his illegal 
drug abuse leads me to accept as credible his assertions of no future intent to use 
marijuana, cocaine, or MDMA under any circumstances. Applicant has demonstrated 
sufficient intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future. He signed a statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. He has matured and 
understands that any illegal drug involvement is incompatible with his defense 
contractor employment. Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
Government’s concerns under AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s infrequent but 
illegal drug use occurred over a long span. He was irresponsible at the time and did not 
recognize the seriousness of his actions. He has now matured. He has not used illegal 
substances for more than 1.5 years after coming to the revelation that there was no 
room for illegal substances in his future professional life. His changes are permanent 
and the likelihood of recurrence is extremely low. Applicant is respected by those who 
know him. He has a reputation for honestly and trustworthiness. Applicant’s current 
reputation for honesty, coupled with his candor concerning his past drug use, adds 
weight to his commitment to abstain from illegal drug use. The record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant should be granted a security 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
