 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02198 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On July 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated March 12, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 16, 2014. On an unspecified date, Applicant 
responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on 
October 6, 2014. The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2014. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on December 1, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 16, 2014. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) and four 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE 4) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and two other witnesses testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
January 5, 2015. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant 
took advantage of that opportunity. He submitted additional documents which were 
marked as AE E through AE L and admitted into evidence without objection. The record 
closed on December 22, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). Applicant’s answers are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Although he has 
worked on the same contract since April 2007, when his initial employer’s contract 
expired in September 2010, Applicant was retained and employed in the same position 
by the defense contractor that took over the contract.2 A June 1978 high school 
graduate,3 Applicant received an associate’s degree in applied science in October 
2003,4 and is well on his way to completing requirements for a bachelor’s degree in 
psychology, with an anticipated completion date of May 2017.5 He has held a secret 
(and sometimes a top secret) security clearance since 1981.6 Applicant was married in 
December 1986, and divorced in October 1991. He remarried in January 1997, and was 
again divorced in July 2007.7 Although he has no biological offspring, Applicant adopted 
a son (born in 1993) of his second wife, and that child resides with him. 
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11. 
 
3
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 2, 2013), at 1. 
 
4
 AE H (Diploma, dated October 3, 2003). 
 
5
 AE K (Academic Evaluation, dated December 19, 2014); GE 1, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 28; GE 2, supra note 3, at 1; Tr. at 52. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Military Service 
 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in May 1981, and he served on active 
duty until he retired honorably in May 2007. During his military service, he was awarded 
the Meritorious Service Medal (with one cluster), the Air Force Commendation Medal 
(with two clusters), the Air Force Achievement Medal (with one cluster), the Joint 
Meritorious Unit Award, the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award (with eight clusters), the 
Air Force Good Conduct Medal (with eight clusters), the National Defense Service 
Medal (with one service star), the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, the Southwest 
Asia Service Medal (with two service stars), the Global War on Terrorism Service 
Medal, the Armed Forces Service Medal, the Humanitarian Service Medal (with one 
service star), the Air Force Overseas Ribbon Short, the Air Force Overseas Ribbon 
Long, the Air Force Longevity Service Ribbon (with five clusters), the USAF NCO PME 
Graduate Ribbon (with one cluster), the Small Arms Expert Marksmanship Ribbon 
(Rifle), the Air Force Training Ribbon, the NATO Medal, the Kuwait Liberation of Kuwait 
Medal, and the Saudi Arabian Medal for the Liberation of Kuwait.8 
 
In addition to his formal awards, Applicant was the recipient of frequent 
accolades, “pat on the back” awards, and letters of appreciation from a number of unit 
commanders. He was named the Senior NCO of the Month on at least three 
occasions.9 Applicant’s performance reports for the last five years reflect the highest 
ratings possible – called firewalls.10 The common assessment of his judgment was 
“highly respected and skilled.”11 Applicant’s military duties involved nuclear weapons, 
and as such, for many years he was under the Air Force Personnel Reliability Program 
(PRP), used by all branches of the military service with such duties to ensure personnel 
are reliable to perform nuclear-related responsibilities.12  
 
Financial Considerations 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about February 2012. 
Applicant attributed most of his financial problems to difficulties derived from his 
teenage son’s “knucklehead years,” during which he had anger issues and punched 
holes through walls, smashed dashboards and car windows, and lost his job. Applicant 
assisted him financially, using his credit card to purchase needed items, which he did 
not describe. Because of Applicant’s work, the economy, and rising gasoline prices, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17-18. 
 
8
 AE I (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214, dated May 31, 2007); AE L 
(Verification of Military Experience and Training, dated July 1, 2014). 
 
9
 AE G (Certificates and Letters, various dates). 
 
10
 AE J (Senior Enlisted Performance Reports, various dates); Tr. at 53. 
 
11
 AE J, supra note 10, at 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. 
 
12
 Tr. at 53. A PRP-certified individual is observed for compliance with reliability standards on an ongoing 
basis that considers duty performance, and on- and off-duty behavior, and reliability on a continuing and frequent 
basis. See § DL. 12, DoD 5210.42-R, Nuclear Weapons Personnel Reliability Program (PRP), June 30, 2006. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant was unable to keep up with his monthly payments, and while he would 
sometimes have some extra funds to make larger payments, he was eventually forced 
to prioritize his expenses, and made food and shelter his priorities over making credit 
card payments.13  
Applicant contacted his creditors in an effort to make repayment arrangements, 
and, with financial benefits of up to approximately $700 per month obtained under the 
G.I Bill from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, he was able to pay down some of 
his balances. In March 2012, he paid off his vehicle, and then started paying down other 
accounts.14 In April 2013, it was Applicant’s intention to bring all of his delinquent 
accounts current within two or three months.15 He stopped using credit cards and 
reduced his expenses by cutting back on cable, the phone, and eating out.16 He 
managed to pay off some of the smaller accounts, and he just keeps “hacking away on 
them.”17 He eventually caught up on nearly every one of his debts by either paying them 
off entirely or by reducing the balances.18 Although Applicant had not received any 
financial counseling before the hearing, he is scheduled to attend a financial counseling 
session on budgeting basics in February 2015. He would have attended an earlier 
January 2015 session but was unable to do so because of a work-related absence.19 
The SOR identified three delinquent debts that had been placed for collection or 
charged off, as reflected by a March 2013 credit report,20 a March 2014 credit report,21 
and a November 2014 credit report.22 Those debts, totaling approximately $16,070, and 
their respective current status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted 
by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are 
described below. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): There is a credit card with a credit limit of $8,500 and a remaining 
balance of $8,853 that was placed for collection and charged off.23 Although none of the 
credit reports reflect that the account has been transferred or sold, the account was 
                                                          
13
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 1-2; Tr. at 32-34. 
 
14
 Tr. at 36-37. 
 
15
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
16
 Tr. at 54-55. 
 
17
 Tr. at 36. 
 
18
 Tr. at 54. 
 
19
 Tr. at 56; AE E (e-mail, dated December 19, 2014), at 2; AE F (Family Readiness Center Calendar, 
undated), at 1. 
 
20
 GE 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated March 15, 2013). 
 
21
 GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 24, 2014). 
 
22
 GE 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated November 7, 2014). 
 
23
 GE 4, supra note 20, at 7. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
sold, in turn, to two different debt purchasers.24 Applicant made intermittent payments to 
the original creditor when he could do so, and then several substantial payments (of 
$200 or more per month) to the first debt purchaser in 2013 and 2014. Upon receiving a 
notice from the successor debt purchaser in July 2014, he has been making smaller, but 
more frequent, payments to that debt purchaser.25 Although Applicant’s repayment 
arrangement with the current debt purchaser calls for him to make monthly $100 
payments, Applicant has made several increased payments when he is able to.26 In July 
2014, Applicant’s remaining balance had diminished to approximately $7,953, and by 
December 2014, it was approximately $7,300.27 The account is in the process of being 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): There is an account with a warehouse club store with a credit limit 
of $2,100 and a remaining balance of $1,794 that was placed for collection and sold to a 
debt purchaser.28  Applicant initially confused this account with another account, and 
thought he was making payments on it, but he was wrong. He subsequently made 
intermittent payments of $100 or more to the debt purchaser when he could do so in 
2013 and 2014.29 Applicant was informed by the debt purchaser that it had sold the 
account to another debt purchaser, and refused to accept his last attempted payment.30 
Applicant’s effort to pay the original creditor was also refused.31 Applicant called the 
telephone number associated with the second debt purchaser on two or three 
occasions, but the number was never answered.32 He also sent the company an e-mail, 
but never received a reply.33 He researched the second company on the Internet and all 
the references to that company were negative.34 Applicant wants to pay the debt, but he 
does not know how since they will not answer their phone.35 While the account has not 
been resolved, it appears that Applicant has made extensive, reasonable efforts to do 
so, and those efforts have been rejected by the current debt owner. 
                                                          
24
 Tr. at 31-32. 
 
25
 AE A (Schedule of Payments, undated); Tr. at 31, 38-41. 
 
26
 Tr. at 40; AE A, supra note 25; AE D (Bank Register, undated). 
 
27
 Tr. at 31, 39. 
 
28
 GE 4, supra note 20, at 9; GE 3, supra note 15, at 6. 
 
29
 Tr. at 42-43; AE B (Schedule of Payments, undated); AE D, supra note 26. 
 
30
 Tr. at 43-44. 
 
31
 Tr. at 43. 
 
32
 Tr. at 43-47. 
 
33
 Tr. at 47. 
 
34
 Tr. at 43. 
 
35
 Tr. at 44, 46. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): There is a credit card with a credit limit of $4,950 and a remaining 
past due balance of $5,896 that was placed for collection and charged off.36 Applicant 
made intermittent payments when he could do so in 2013, but when the account was 
charged off, he could no longer enter the company website to continue doing so. He 
eventually called the collection agent in July 2014 and set up a repayment arrangement 
under which $150 is automatically withdrawn from his bank account on the same day 
each month. Monthly payments have been made each month since the arrangement 
was established.37 As of December 2014, the unpaid balance has been reduced to 
approximately $4,946.38 The account is in the process of being resolved. 
Work Performance and Character References 
 Applicant’s supervisor and task lead has known Applicant for over seven years, 
and he sees Applicant daily, if not hourly. He characterized Applicant as the most 
reliable, trustworthy, and responsible person on “their task.” Applicant is dedicated to his 
team and job, and travels world-wide to train individuals whenever there is a 
requirement within a major center where technical data is being written and produced. 
He is aware of Applicant’s financial issues and has no reservations about supporting 
Applicant’s application to retain a security clearance.39 Applicant’s friend and 
professional colleague for over 32 years also is highly supportive of Applicant’s 
application. He indicated Applicant has an outstanding reputation for reliability and 
trustworthiness. He noted Applicant’s community activities in support of Toys-For-
Tots.40 While on active duty with the U.S. Air Force, Applicant served as a Webelos 
scout leader, coach for the intramural softball teams, and assistant coach for the high 
school track team, and erected playground equipment for the local elementary school.41 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”42 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
36
 GE 4, supra note 20, at 7. 
 
37
 Tr. at 51; AE C (Schedule of Payments, undated); AE D, supra note 26. 
 
38
 AE C, supra note 37. 
 
39
 Tr. at 20-25. 
 
40
 Tr. at 26-29. 
 
41
 AE J, supra note 10, at 2, 6, 8, 10; AE G (Letter of Appreciation, dated June 4, 2004). 
 
42
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”43   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”44 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.45  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”46 
                                                          
43
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
44
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
45
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
46
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”47 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s most significant financial problems arose in February 
2012.  He was unable to continue making his routine monthly payments and various 
accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off. AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
47
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”48  
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did not spend beyond his 
means. Instead, as noted above, Applicant’s initial financial problems started in 
February 2012, occasioned by his son’s emotional issues and destructive actions. As a 
single parent and loving father, Applicant assisted his son financially, to his own 
financial peril. The combination of the poor economy, increasing gasoline prices, and 
Applicant’s work took its toll, and Applicant was forced to prioritize his monthly 
payments because of an inability to make his normal payments. To his credit, Applicant 
took control over the perilous financial situation and contacted his creditors in an effort 
to make repayment arrangements. He enrolled in school full-time to obtain the 
maximum G.I. Bill benefits, and started addressing his delinquent accounts. He reduced 
unnecessary expenses. Applicant’s overall repayment strategy has been successful, 
and he has resolved, or is in the process of resolving, with only one exception, all of his 
delinquent debts.  
He is scheduled to receive counseling from a financial counselor, and the 
counselor will be guiding him on budget basics. All of Applicant’s newer accounts are 
current. Two of Applicant’s SOR-related accounts are in the process of being resolved 
with monthly payment arrangements, and those payments are being routinely made. 
The one remaining account is difficult to resolve, not because of any lack of effort by 
Applicant, but rather by the refusal of the debt purchaser to respond to Applicant’s 
efforts to contact it. Applicant’s son is now older, and there is no evidence of continuing 
problems with his conduct. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances confronting 
him, do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.49 
  
                                                          
48
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
49
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.50       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His handling of 
his finances permitted a number of accounts to become delinquent. As a result, various 
accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has an outstanding reputation in the workplace and in the communities in 
which he has resided. Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by frivolous or 
irresponsible spending, and he did not spend beyond his means. Rather, his problems 
were caused by his son’s emotional outbursts and destructive actions, all of which were 
largely beyond Applicant’s control. He helped his son financially when he could really 
not afford to do so. With the exception of one debt purchaser’s account, Applicant has 
resolved, or is in the process of resolving, all of the accounts identified in the SOR, as 
well the ones not listed in the SOR. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. His actions under the circumstances confronting him do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
                                                          
50
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 51 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
51
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
