                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14–01847
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 22, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
dated August 30, 2005, and November 7, 2013.  (Government Exhibits 1 and 2.)  On
July 28, 2014, the Defense of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and E for Applicant. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
“Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on August 12, 2014, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on September 25, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued October 1, 2014,
and the hearing was scheduled for December 2, 2014.  At the hearing the Government
presented three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 3.  The
Applicant presented nine exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through I.  He
also testified on his own behalf.  After the record closed, Applicant submitted two Post-
Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B, that were
2
admitted without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on December 10,
2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
   
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 33 years old and married with one child.  He has a Bachelor’s
Degree in Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Project Engineer.
He is attempting to retain his security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(See Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  
Applicant was introduced to marijuana at the age of fifteen, by his neighbor and
best friend who lived across the street.  They met in third grade, and over the years
grew to be best friends.  It became their habit to smoke marijuana together.  Applicant’s
best friend always provided the Applicant with the marijuana they smoked.  From 1997
to 1999, while in high school, the Applicant used marijuana about three-or-four times a
week.  From 1999 to 2004 while in college, the Applicant and his best friend grew apart,
but continued to use marijuana together at least once a year and Applicant smoked
marijuana on several other occasions with friends from college.  Applicant testified that
usually his use of marijuana occurred at parties, holidays, and during the summers.  In
total, Applicant estimates that he has used marijuana at least 200 to 300 times, and no
more than 500 times.  (Tr. p. 65.) 
In 2005, Applicant got his first real engineering job, and started working for a
defense contractor.  At that time, he also applied for and was granted a security
clearance.  He knew that the application process required a drug test, and he passed it.
(Tr. p. 44.)  Applicant continued to use marijuana on about four occasions after being
granted a security clearance, until he claims that he stopped in 2009.  He testified that
when he smoked marijuana he would smoke it with his best friend at least once a year
when he saw him.  (Tr. p. 72.)  Applicant did research on marijuana and had convinced
himself that using marijuana was no big deal.  (Tr. pp. 61 and 75.)  In retrospect,
Applicant acknowledges that he was “an idiot.”  (Tr. p.  78.)        
In 2012, Applicant started a new job working for his current employer.  He knew
the work place had a no drug policy.  He testified that his security clearance transferred
with him to his new place of employment.  (Tr. p. 80.)  A year later, in 2013,  it was
required by his employer that Applicant upgrade his security clearance to SCI.  (Tr. p.
54.)  At that time, Applicant was required to complete another security clearance
application.  This time, Applicant revealed his history of marijuana use.  (See
Government Exhibit 2.)  
3
Despite his past use of marijuana, Applicant was able to do well in school and on
the job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, B, C and D.)  His recent performance appraisals for the
periods  from April 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013; and April 1, 3013, through March
31, 2014, reflect an overall rating of “high meets.”  (Applicant’s Exhibits E and G.)  He is
considered a highly-valued member of the project engineering team and is respected by
all levels of engineering management.  (Applicant’s Exhibits E and G.)  In November
2013 Applicant received a job promotion and a pay increase of 5.0%.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit F.) 
Letters from a previous employer, and current coworker who has managed
Applicant in the past, testified that in their opinion, Applicant is highly intelligent,
professional and trustworthy.  He has never been known to violate any of the rules
associated with protecting classified information.  He is very self-disciplined, and a hard
worker.  He is a good leader, colleague and friend.  He fulfills his commitments and is
considered to be a brilliant engineer.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)     
A letter from a senior engineer at his present company, who has worked closely
with the Applicant in the past, and who recommended him for his current position,
indicates that Applicant is trustworthy, reliable, honest and of integrity.  In his opinion,
Applicant consistently exhibits extreme care in properly protecting classified information.
Applicant has never had a security violation, and his technical expertise and specific
skill set is considered to be a great benefit to the company.  Applicant is recommended
for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B.) 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he has engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.  
The Applicant admitted the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant completed a security clearance application
dated August 30, 2005.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Question 24(a) of the application
asked the Applicant if since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, has he illegally used any
controlled substance?  The Applicant responded, “NO.”  This was a false response.
The Applicant failed to list his use of marijuana from 1997 to 2009.       
Applicant explained that when he filled out his first security clearance application
in 2005, he was not truthful.  He realizes that he should have revealed his illegal drug
use.  He stated that at that time he did not understand the gravity of the paperwork, and
he did not want to lose his job.  (Tr. p. 47.) 
Applicant testified that over the past five years, he has made some positive
changes in his life.  He stopped using marijuana in 2009.  He got married in 2011, and
had a child in 2013.  He also admitted his marijuana use on his most recent security
clearance application in November 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  He is the sole
financial provider for his family and takes his position at work seriously.  
4
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates or contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
5
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities;
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
16.(c) the offense is so minor or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
6
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H) and dishonesty or poor
personal conduct (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not
introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case under Guidelines H and E of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant has used marijuana from about 1997 to
2009, at varying frequencies.  In 2005, he started working for a defense contractor and
was granted a DoD security clearance, and continued to use marijuana.  Applicant
testified that he knew his use of marijuana was illegal and against DoD policy.  The fact
that the Applicant failed to follow rules and regulations demonstrates that he is not an
individual whom the Government would find sufficiently trustworthy for clearance.  In
addition, common sense is one of the very basic character requirements that one must
have to be eligible for access to classified information.  In this case, Applicant fell short
in this area.      
7
Applicant claims that he had convinced himself that the use of marijuana was not
a big deal, even though he knew that it was illegal and against DoD policy.  Applicant is
a college-educated man who has worked in the defense industry for the past ten years.
He has no explanation for his misconduct other than to say that he was an idiot, and
that he now has a concrete understanding of the eligibility requirements for security
clearance holders.  Under the circumstances, I find that he intentionally disregarded the
law and DoD policy by using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.  He
contends that he last used marijuana in 2009, about eight years ago.  Under Guideline
H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and  25.(g) any illegal drug use after
being granted a security clearance apply.  It can be argued that Mitigating Conditions
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 26.(b) a demonstrated intent
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using
associates or contacts; and (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used also apply.  Although the Applicant contends that he has not used illegal drugs in
several years, his credibility remains in question.  More time in a drug free lifestyle is
necessary to prove to the Government that he will not return to his old habits.  Using
illegal drugs while holding security a clearance is such egregious conduct showing
warped judgment to some extent, which raises serious security concerns about his
reliability and trustworthiness.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline
H, Drug Involvement. 
Furthermore, Applicant deliberately concealed his illegal drug use from the
Government in his answer to question 24.(a) on his security clearance application.
There is no excuse for this misconduct and poor judgment.  The Government relies
heavily on the representations of its civilian employees and must be able to trust them in
every instance.  Under the particular facts of this case, his poor personal conduct is
considered a significant security risk, which prohibits a favorable determination in this
case.  Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities applies.  Mitigating Condition 16.(c) the offense is so minor or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment is also applicable, but not controlling here.
Although nine years has passed since the Applicant falsified his security clearance
application, he did not come forward with the truth until he needed a security clearance
upgrade and was required to fill out another application.  It can also be argued that
since Applicant admitted his marijuana use on his most recent security clearance
application that his concealment in the past should be mitigated.  I do not find either of
these arguments convincing.  Applicant was entrusted with the national secrets based
upon erroneous information he deliberately provided the Government.  His credibility
8
remains in question.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  I have considered all of the evidence,
including his favorable letters of recommendation.  Under the particular facts of this
case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole,
support a whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a
lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualification
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the Government’s national interest. According to the standards set forth in the Directive,
based upon the conduct outlined here, this Applicant has demonstrated that he is not
trustworthy, and he does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified
information.  
    
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
   
   Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
    
 
9
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
