 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01459 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has seven 
outstanding debts that became delinquent in about 2012, totaling $47,400. His financial 
problems are partially attributed to his divorce. Notwithstanding, he failed to establish 
financial responsibility in the handling of his debts. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 16, 
2013. On May 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on June 16, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on 
September 17, 2014. The case was assigned to me on September 24, 2014. The 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the first notice of hearing on 
October 3, 2014, scheduling a hearing for October 20, 2014. Applicant emailed the 
hearing office staff and stated that he would not attend his hearing because of “pre-
arranged plans.” The second notice of hearing was issued on October 20, 2014, 
scheduling the hearing for November 16, 2014. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4), which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented no exhibits. I left the 
record open to allow Applicant an additional period to submit documentary evidence to 
support his hearing allegations. He did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 17, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 At the hearing, the Government moved to withdraw the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e, 
and to merge the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g into SOR ¶ 1.f. Both motions were 
granted as requested. (Tr. 44) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.i, totaling $47,000. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 
1.g, and 1.h, totaling $7,000. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, 
including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old logistics coordinator employed by a defense 
contractor. He attended college and completed a bachelor’s degree in electronics in 
1974. Since then, he completed several computer software courses. He married his wife 
in September 1988 and was divorced in August 2012. He has three adult children, ages 
27, 24, and 22. Applicant’s 27-year-old son and his 24-year-old daughter live with him; 
however, only his 24-year-old daughter depends on Applicant for her support. 
 
Applicant has consistently worked for government contractors since 1974. He 
started working for his current employer in 1997. He was first granted access to 
classified information at the secret level from 1974 to 1982. Apparently, he had no need 
for access to classified information from 1982 to 2013. He was granted an interim secret 
clearance when he submitted his November 2013 SCA. His clearance was suspended 
when he was issued the May 2014 SOR. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his November 2013 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) 
that he had some delinquent debts in collection associated with his 2012 divorce. The 
background investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the seven 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $47,400. The SOR debts are 
established by the credit report submitted by the Government and by Applicant’s 
testimony.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s financial problems appear to be the result of his separation from his 
wife in November 2010, and subsequent divorce in August 2012. While married, 
Applicant paid the mortgage and a $50,000 home equity line of credit loan, and his wife 
paid all remaining debts. He averred that while married, he and his wife had good credit 
and no financial problems. When they separated, she stopped paying her share of the 
debts and he was forced to assume responsibility for them. Applicant’s ex-wife also 
refused to contribute to the mortgage and home equity line of credit loan payments. His 
income was based on a $36 hourly wage rate. He was financially unable to pay the 
debts and his family’s day-to-day living expenses, and the debts became delinquent.  
 
Concerning the delinquent debts, Applicant explained that SOR ¶ 1.a concerns a 
jewelry item he purchased for his wife while they were married. When they separated, 
she stopped paying the debt. Applicant’s income was insufficient to pay the debt, and it 
became delinquent. In 2012, the creditor obtained a $5,000 judgment against Applicant. 
In February 2013, the creditor started collecting the judgment through a garnishment of 
wages imposed against Applicant. (GE 2)  
 
At his hearing, Applicant claimed that he had established a payment 
arrangement with the creditor of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and that he had been paying 
$100 a month during the last two years. He failed to present any documentary evidence 
to support his claim. (Tr. 24-25) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted he was financially responsible for the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.h. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 
1.h originated from medical services provided to his children while they were 
unemployed. Applicant claimed that he asked his children to pay their past-due medical 
expenses, but they have failed to do so. He testified that he intends to pay the medical 
debts if his children fail to do so. Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to 
show that he maintained contact with his creditors, established payment plans, or 
disputed any of the SOR debts. 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i were for student loans Applicant 
cosigned for his children. Applicant’s daughter stopped attending school, does not have 
a job, and she does not have the financial means to repay the debt. His son is working, 
but he has not started paying his student loan. Applicant claimed his son’s student loan 
was in deferment. However, the credit report in evidence shows the student loan 
became delinquent in October 2011 and was charged off. (GE 2) Applicant failed to 
present any documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
Applicant believes that his current financial situation is stable. He claimed that his 
present earnings allow him to meet his current financial obligations. He has a net 
monthly income of $3,800. He stated that he follows the budget that he established in 
August 2012. He is currently one month behind on his mortgage payments, but he 
claimed that he is in the process of modifying his mortgage loan. He presented no 
documentary evidence to support his claim. He was advised by the mortgage holder to 
 
4 
 
 
visit a financial counselor, but has yet to do so. Applicant stated that he no longer uses 
credit cards for his financial expenses. 
 
Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to show that he maintained 
contact with his creditors, voluntarily established payment plans, or disputed any of the 
SOR debts. He presented no evidence to show he has received financial counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The evidence established the seven delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling $47,400. Financial considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has been fully employed with 
a government contractor since 1997, and has current net earnings of around $3,800 a 
month. Outside of his garnishment of wages to pay for his delinquent jewelry debt (SOR 
 
6 
 
 
¶ 1.a), he presented no documentary evidence of any debt payments. He is one month 
behind on his mortgage payment. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, and he 
owes a large debt. I considered that the debts became delinquent, in part, because of 
his divorce and him providing financial assistance to his children. Applicant’s divorce 
could be considered as a circumstance beyond his control that contributed or 
aggravated his financial problems.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show financial 
responsibility with respect to any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He failed to present 
documentary evidence to show that he maintained contact with his creditors, 
established payment plans, or disputed any of the SOR debts. He presented no 
evidence to show he received financial counseling. Moreover, there are no clear 
indications that his financial problems are under control, or that Applicant has a viable 
plan to address his financial problems. In light of all available evidence, Applicant’s 
unresolved debts and lack of financial responsibility cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 1997. He has 
seven outstanding debts that became delinquent after his 2012 divorce. He failed to 
submit sufficient documentary evidence to establish financial responsibility in the 
handling of his financial obligations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d,      
   1.f, 1.h, and 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:      Withdrawn 
 
 Subparagraph 1.g:      Merged with SOR ¶ 1.f 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
