                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-02016           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On July 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 11, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 26, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on
November 13, 2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-
5). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 13 exhibits (AEs A-D). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on November 24, 2014. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payment initiatives
and character references. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to
supplement the record. The Government was afforded two days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with email
correspondence, documented open accounts and debts paid or otherwise resolved.
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were admitted as AEs E-P.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated three adverse judgments
exceeding $15,000 and eight delinquent debts exceeding $44,000. Allegedly, none of the
listed debts have been paid. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the debts while claiming he
paid off one of the judgment debts (creditor 1.b) and is paying off another judgment
creditor (creditor 1.a). Applicant claimed he was out of work for several years during the
recession and encountered difficulty keeping up with all of his own bills. 
Applicant further claimed that two of the listed debts (creditors 1.j and 1.k) were
covered by write-offs by the same creditor, who issued IRS 1099 forms reflecting imputed
income.  He claimed he has since paid income taxes on the imputed income from these
two debts. And he claimed he contacted other creditors with the intention of working out
payment arrangements, now that he is gainfully employed.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old sales vice president for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first spouse in September 1973 and divorced her in March
1981. (GE 1) He remarried in March 1981 and divorced his second wife in April 1990. He
has one adult child from this marriage. Applicant married his third and current spouse in
May 1994 and has no children from this marriage. He earned an associate’s degree in
June 1971 and  claimed no military service. (GE 1; Tr. 41-42) 
3
Applicant’s finances
Applicant was self-employed between June 1975 and January 2013. (GE 1; Tr. 42)
He owned a customer computer business and at one time employed 35 employees. (GE
5; Tr. 42)  His business suffered considerably during the recession, and by 2013, he was
down to just one employee when he closed the business. (GE 5; Tr. 36-39, 42-44) At the
time he closed his business, he estimates he earned between $70,000 and $80,000. (Tr.
45) 
Between 2008 and 2013 (while his business struggled for survival), Applicant
accrued a number of delinquent credit card debts. (GEs 1-5; Tr. 39-40) He attributed his
debt delinquencies to the difficult economic conditions he experienced during the lengthy
recession.  (GE 5; Tr. 36-42) Applicant characterized his over-reliance on credit cards to
keep his business afloat as “going into credit card hell.” (Tr. 39) 
Credit reports reveal three judgments taken against Applicant between 2011 and
2013. (GEs 2-4) In November 2011, creditor 1.c obtained an adverse judgment against
Applicant in the amount of $7,135. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 45-46) Applicant has not documented his
satisfaction of this judgment.  (GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 51)
In May 2012, creditor 1.b obtained an adverse judgment against Applicant in the
amount of $4,410. (GEs 2-4) The debt covered by subparagraph 1.d (also $4,411) of the
SOR is a manifest duplicate of the judgment debt listed in subparagraph 1.b and is
credited to Applicant as a duplicate. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 50-51) Applicant documented his
satisfaction of the creditor 1.b judgment in February 2014. (AE O) 
A third judgment was taken against Applicant by creditor 1.a in December 2013 in
the amount of $3,418. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 45-46) This judgment debt is an apparent duplicate
of the debt covered in subparagraph 1.h of the SOR.  Accordingly, the creditor 1.h debt is
credited to Applicant as a duplicate. (GEs 2-4 and AEs E and L; Tr. 51-52) Applicant
satisfied the creditor 1.a judgment with a $3,900 cashiers check in October 2014. (AEs E
and J)
Besides the listed judgment debts, Applicant accumulated other debt delinquencies
between 2009 and 2012 when he lacked sufficient funds to address all of his bills. Credit
reports reveal the following debts owned by Applicant that are not covered by the three
judgments taken against him: creditor 1.e ($3,284); creditor 1.f ($4,544); creditor 1.g
($7,777); creditor 1.i ($8,311); creditor 1.j ($2,828); and creditor 1.k ($9,672). (GEs 2-4
and AE E) 
Two of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts (creditors 1.j and 1.k) are quite old.
Records reveal that Applicant opened his (a) creditor 1.j account in July 2005 (GEs 2-4);
and (b) creditor 1.k account in August 1995. Both debts were charged off without any
proof of Applicant payments. (AEs F-G; Tr. 54-55) Without payment proof, no inferences
of payment or settlement are available to Applicant.
4
Applicant’s remaining debts have not been paid or otherwise resolved. While the
creditor 1.g debt cannot be identified (AE E), Applicant has initiated no documented
negotiations with creditors 1.c, 1.f, or 1.i. (GEs 2-5 and AEs D-H; Tr. 45, 49-53) Any
payments made to any of these creditors cannot be verified. (Tr. 54-55)
Applicant currently earns about $140,000 from his current employment and was
recently promoted to the position of senior vice president. (Tr. 43) He keeps
approximately $6,000 in his checking account and about $20,000 in his 401(k) retirement
account. (Tr. 63-64) Applicant received a $7,198 tax refund in connection with his timely
filed 2013 tax return (AE A) and used the proceeds on a vacation trip with a timeshare.
(Tr. 54-55) His security clearance application (e-QIP) reflects other vacation trips taken
over the past eight and one-half years, financed in part with his tax refunds. (GE 1; Tr. 55-
56) 
Since September 2014, Applicant has worked with a credit repair group whose
assigned mission is to challenge credit card information in Applicant’s credit reports. (Tr.
47-48) The repair group told him they will need two to three months to clean up his bills
and credit report. (AE ; Tr. 47-48) Applicant has paid the group $200 to date and received
a credit report progress statement from this group in November 2014. (AE D; Tr. 70-71)
He received a D grade on his credit history. While Applicant still retains credit cards, he
no longer incurs any credit card debt. (Tr. 41, 67-70) To date, though, his repair group
has not negotiated any settlements with any of his unpaid creditors. (Tr. 49)
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by an old friend who considers Applicant a member of
his family. In the past, he has had numerous business dealings with Applicant and
brokered the sale of his business and home. (AE P) This friend holds the mortgage on
Applicant’s current residence, and he considers Applicant trustworthy. (AE P)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
5
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
6
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable in part to his diminished earnings during a difficult period in 2009-2013 when
his business struggled with lowered revenues. Over-reliant on credit cards to operate
his business, he encountered difficulties keeping up with his monthly credit card bills
when confronted with challenging economic conditions. Applicant’s actions warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s payment problems in the 2009-2013 time-frame were mostly due to
diminished income attributable to depressed economic conditions that adversely his
business. Extenuating circumstances affected of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Since his
return to gainful employment in 2013, Applicant has made modest efforts in addressing
his delinquent credit card debts and documented the payoff of his creditor 1.a and
creditor 1.b judgments. Still, most of his debts (over 80 per cent) remain outstanding
7
and are not covered by any payment plans. Applicant’s efforts to date, which reflect
positive initial steps, merit no more than partial application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”   
Applicant’s documented debt payments and modest steps taken to repair his
credit reflect encouraging, but insufficient payment progress to satisfy the minimum
criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his
poor financial condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s significant
repayment actions to date do not enable him to meet the Appeal’s Board requirements
for stabilizing his finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008). See
ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1,
1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant has considerable support from an old
friend in his efforts to establish his good judgment credentials. His payment initiatives to
date, though, have been modest and not enough to demonstrate a good track record for
paying his debts and stabilizing his finances. While encouraging, his corrective actions
to date are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.c, 1.e-1.g; and 1.i-1.k:                       Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.a-1.b, 1.d, and 1.h:                         For Applicant
                        Conclusio  n  s    
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
