KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: DOHA personnel provided Applicant with sufficient information about his right to
present evidence.  Applicant has suffered no due process violation. The Judge did not err in
concluding that Applicant’s debts raised security concerns.  His having previously lost a
clearance due to bad debt should have placed him on notice of the possible impact financial
problems can have on clearance eligibility.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  A
Judge has no authority to serve as an investigator.  The impact that an unfavorable decision
might have on an applicant is not relevant.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-00434.a1
DATE: 01/20/2015
DATE: January 20, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00434
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 21, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 31, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of
2
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
whether the Judge erred in concluding that his circumstances raised security concerns; and whether
the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works as a consultant for a Defense contractor.  He previously served in the U.S.
military, from which he retired.  He held a clearance form 1991 until 2007, at which point it was
revoked due to financial issues caused by his ex-wife’s spending.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges numerous delinquent debts, including a debt to the IRS, a failure
to file his Federal tax return, utility services, cable services, consumer debts, etc.  In his clearance
interview, Applicant stated that he intended to pay his delinquent debts, stating that he was able to
meet all of his financial obligations.  He attributed his current problems to his domestic partner’s
decrease in pay.  In his Answer to the SOR he stated that he would pay most of his debts within two
to six months.  He provided no character references or evidence as to the quality of his job
performance.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s delinquent debts, accumulated between 2007 and
2013, along with his failure to file his Federal tax return, raised concerns under Guideline F.  In
concluding that Applicant had failed to mitigate these concerns, the Judge cited to evidence that he
had previously been denied a clearance for financial delinquencies.  He also concluded that
Applicant had failed to demonstrate responsible action in regard to his debts.  The Judge noted that
Applicant’s problems were affected by his partner’s loss of pay; however, he stated that there is no
evidence that he had addressed even his smallest debts.  
Discussion
Applicant asserts that he was denied due process.  He states that he was not aware that he
had to send in evidence to show debt payment.  We note that the memorandum from Department
Counsel that accompanied the File of Relevant Material (FORM) advised Applicant of his right “to
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or
explanation” regarding the information contained therein.  In addition, the FORM was accompanied
by a letter from a DOHA official advising him of his right “to submit any material you wish the
Administrative Judge to consider.”  DOHA also provided Applicant with a copy of the Directive,
which contains a description of his right to submit evidence.  We conclude that the information that
DOHA personnel provided to Applicant was sufficient to apprise a reasonable person of the extent
3
of his right to present evidence.  We find no reason to believe that Applicant was denied the due
process afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 12-02296 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2014).
Applicant contends that his circumstances do not raise concerns under Guideline F.  He
asserts that he is “not in dire need for money,” and that he is not being pursued by creditors.  The
gist of his argument appears to be that he will not engage in illegal activity in order to pay his debts.
We have previously said, however, that the concern under Guideline F is not simply that a person’s
financial problems may tempt him or her to commit crimes.  The Guideline also states that failure
to satisfy debts 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Directive, Enclosure 2
¶ 18.  See ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 26, 2012). 
In the case before us, the evidence shows that Applicant had previously lost a clearance due
to financial problems, which was sufficient to have placed him on notice of the possible impact of
delinquent debt on his clearance eligibility.  Nevertheless, since that time he amassed additional
debt, which had not been resolved as of the close of the record.  This evidence was sufficient to raise
a concern that Applicant may be lacking in the judgment and reliability expected of persons with
access to classified information.  The Judge did not err in concluding that Applicant’s circumstances
raised security concerns.
Applicant cites to his Answer to the SOR, which states  that he had filed his 2012 tax return
and that he had paid down his tax debt.  The Judge made findings about this evidence.  Applicant’s
argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  Applicant’s brief
asserts matters from outside the record concerning his effort at debt repayment.  We cannot consider
new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
Applicant contends that the Judge erred by not contacting his creditors regarding the extent
to which he had addressed his debts.  A Judge has no authority to serve as an investigator in a
DOHA case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-03500 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012) (“Any attempt by
a Judge independently to investigate allegations would conflict with his or her role as an impartial
fact-finder”). When the Government produces evidence of security concern, it is the applicant’s
responsibility to present evidence in mitigation.  The applicant bears the burden of persuasion.  See
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  If Applicant had additional evidence that he believed relevant to his case, it
was his duty to provide it.  However, despite Department Counsel having opined in the FORM that
the record as it then stood was not sufficient to mitigate Applicant’s concerns, he submitted nothing
in response.  Accordingly, the Judge’s decision was consistent with the record that was before him.
Applicant cites to his job loss, resulting from the denial of his clearance.  The impact that
an unfavorable decision may have on an applicant is not a relevant or material consideration in
4
evaluating his or her security eligibility.  See ISCR Case No. 11-13180 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 21,
2013). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  Applicant’s presentation consists of promises
of future debt payment, which is not a substitute for a demonstrated track record of debt resolution.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-02926 at 2 (App. Bd. May 11, 2014).   “The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
