 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04572 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 23, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was alleged to 
be in debt in the approximate amount of $63,177.99. His financial difficulties were 
caused by circumstances beyond his control and he has acted responsibly with respect 
to his debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 15, 
 
2 
 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 15, 2014, scheduling the hearing for January 6, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. GE 1 through GE 5 were admitted without objection. Applicant offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 14, 2015. 
The record was left open until January 16, 2015, for Applicant to submit additional 
exhibits. On that day, he submitted two additional exhibits, marked AE K and AE L. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE K and AE L. They were admitted into the 
record and the record was closed. 
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR ¶ 1.i to correct 
a typographical error. It was changed from: 
 
i. You are indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in the 
approximate amount of $7,499.86 for tax year 2009. Records reflect an 
installment agreement had been approved. As of September 2012 the 
taxes remain unpaid. 
 
To: 
 
i. You are indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in the 
approximate amount of $7,499.86 for tax year 2010. Records reflect an 
installment agreement had been approved. As of September 2012 the 
taxes remain unpaid. 
 
Applicant had no objection to the amendment and I granted the motion. (Tr. 62.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served 
honorably in the Marine Corps for 20 years. He retired from the Marine Corps at the 
rank of Gunnery Sergeant (E7). He has worked in his current job for over ten years, 
although his employer has changed due to changes in defense contractors. He has held 
a secret level security clearance for 28 years, without incident. He is married and has 
one adult child. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 24-25, 34-35.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt in the approximate 
amount of $63,177.99. He was alleged to have failed to file his Federal and state tax 
returns for 2011. Applicant denied all of the debts with explanations. His debts are found 
in the credit reports entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3; 
GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant attributes his debts to two events beyond his control. In late 2004 or 
early 2005, tenants that dwelled in a home owned by Applicant and his wife failed to pay 
rent. Applicant’s wife had owned the home when they married. It was later put into both 
of their names when they refinanced the property. When the tenants stopped paying 
rent, Applicant and his wife were forced to evict them. The eviction process was lengthy 
and took over nine months. During that period, Applicant paid the entire mortgage for 
the home, but relied on his credit cards to survive. Additionally, when the tenants 
vacated the property after eviction, they caused $15,000 in damages to the property. 
Applicant was unable to re-rent the property. Applicant obtained a judgment against the 
renters, but it was unenforceable after the renters could not be located. Applicant 
withdrew all funds from his IRA savings account and tried to make ends meet by using 
credit cards in 2005 and 2006. However, in mid-2006, Applicant’s employer changed 
and his salary was reduced by nearly 50%. He was unable to sell the rental property 
because he owed more on the mortgage than it was worth. As a result, he became 
delinquent on his credit cards and mortgages. He has slowly repaid his debts, as 
resources allowed, since that time. He no longer uses credit cards. He pays cash for all 
purchases. (Tr. 25-26, 39-42.) His debts alleged on the SOR are as follows. 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $15,387 on a 
total balance of $201,452, as stated in subparagraph 1.a of the SOR. This debt was for 
the mortgage on Applicant’s rental property. Applicant sold the property, though a short 
sale, in December 2014 for $184,000. The closing documentation shows this debt was 
satisfied. (AE I; Tr. 25-26, 42, 58.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $13,818, as stated in 
subparagraph 1.b of the SOR. Applicant testified that this debt was incurred when he 
needed a new transmission and a down payment for his wife’s vehicle. Applicant has 
been in contact with this creditor, but he had difficulties negotiating a payment 
arrangement he could afford. On January 15, 2015, Applicant reached a written 
repayment agreement with this creditor to settle this debt through 12 monthly payments 
of $350. Applicant is addressing this debt. (AE L; Tr. 27-28, 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $287 on a 
total balance of $8,354, as stated in subparagraph 1.c of the SOR. Applicant testified 
this debt is for his son’s vehicle and that the account is now current. Applicant’s 
December 11, 2014 credit report reflects that while this account had fallen $287 past 
due in December 2013, Applicant appears to be current on his monthly obligation to this 
creditor. (GE 5; Tr. 29-31, 45.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $5,313, as stated in 
subparagraph 1.d of the SOR. Applicant testified that this account is current. Applicant’s 
December 11, 2014 credit report reflects that while this account has fallen past due, he 
is now current on his monthly payment to this creditor. (GE 5; Tr. 31-32, 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $653, as 
stated in subparagraph 1.e of the SOR. Applicant presented a letter from a collection 
 
4 
 
agent for this creditor that indicated this debt “has been settled.” This debt is resolved. 
(AE L; Tr. 32, 49.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted for state taxes in the amounts of $4,325.75 
and $3,978.49, respectively, for the 2009 and 2010 tax years as stated in 
subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g of the SOR. Applicant has a payment arrangement with his 
state taxation authority to resolve this debt through monthly payments of $300. He has 
successfully made his monthly payments on this debt since January 2014. Applicant is 
resolving this debt. (AE C; AE D; AE G; AE L; Tr. 58-71.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted for Federal taxes in the amounts of 
$3,828.89 and $7,499.86, respectively, for the 2009 and 2010 tax years as stated in 
subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i of the SOR. Applicant has a payment arrangement with the 
IRS to resolve this debt through monthly payments of $215. His December 2014 IRS 
installment agreement statement shows that his remaining balance is now $605.90. 
Applicant is resolving this debt. (AE B; AE E; AE F; AE H; Tr. 58-71.) 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant failed to file his state and Federal tax 
returns for the 2011 tax year. Applicant presented an account transcript from the IRS 
that shows he filed his 2011 federal tax return in November 2012. He also presented 
documentation that shows he filed his 2012 tax return. He testified that he received an 
extension on his 2013 tax return, but plans to file it in the near future. He hired a 
Certified Public Accountant to assist him with his 2013 tax return filings. While his 
statements from the state do not show the date he filed his 2011 and 2012 tax returns, 
they do verify Appellant is making payments on his tax debt from that year. He credibly 
testified that he filed both his state and Federal tax returns for 2011. (AE B; AE C; AE D; 
AE F; AE G; AE J; Tr. 58-71.) 
 
 Applicant presented two letters of support. The first, authored by the Director of 
his agency, indicated Applicant is “a hard-working, competent and reliable worker . . . 
and his demonstrated reliability and dependability make [the Director] confident that he 
is worthy of the . . .security clearance.” (AE K.) A co-worker, the author of the second 
letter of support, attested to Applicant’s honestly and personal integrity. (AE K.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he was deployed 12 times during his service in the Marine 
Corps. He received numerous awards and decorations for his service including five 
Navy and Marine Corps Achievement medals. (Tr. 35-36.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant was in debt in the approximate amount of $63,177.99 to numerous 
creditors, including his state taxation authority and the IRS, since 2009. He failed to file 
his state and Federal tax returns for 2011. The evidence raises the above security 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate these 
concerns.  
 
 Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 fully apply:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are due to unforeseen circumstances. He was forced to evict a 
tenant that failed to pay rent and then caused significant damage to his property. 
Additionally, his pay was cut significantly when another Government contractor won the 
bid for his facility. Applicant has either resolved or is making payments on all of his 
alleged debts. He has filed his state and Federal 2011 tax returns. He has acted 
responsibly with respect to all of the debts on the SOR and made a good-faith effort to 
repay his creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply.  
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant served 
honorably in the Marine Corps. He was deployed 12 times during his military career and 
received a number of commendations for his service. He is trusted by his employer and 
performs well on the job. While he had financial difficulties, he has diligently worked to 
address them. He paid his debts off slowly, as resources allowed. He has recently made 
agreements with his remaining creditors, but has a track record of following through on 
his payment plan. His promise to file his 2013 Federal and state tax return was credible, 
in light of the actions he has taken on all of his debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
