1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-03497 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 26, 2013. 
On August 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 25, 2014; answered it on September 9, 
2014; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on October 29, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on 
October 31, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
2 
 
of hearing on November 3, 2014, scheduling the hearing for November 20, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s letter transmitting copies 
of GX 1 through 5 to Applicant is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through R, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until December 5, 2014, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX S through 
Z, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding 
AX S through Z are attached to the record as HX II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on December 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old military analyst employed by a defense contractor 
since October 2005. He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from September 
1982 to June 2004. During his active duty, he served for ten years as an enlisted 
Marine, became a warrant officer, was selected for the limited duty officer program, and 
retired as a major. (Tr. 110-11.) His fitness reports as a warrant officer, captain, and 
major were uniformly outstanding, consistently ranking him in the second highest of five 
categories. (AX K through R.) He held a security clearance throughout his active duty in 
the Marine Corps and retained it as an employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 8, 15, 
59.) 
 
 Applicant married in June 1987 and divorced in February 1997. Two children, 
now ages 26 and 24, were born during the marriage. Applicant remarried in June 2013. 
His current wife has two sons, ages 17 and 15, who live with their father. His wife owns 
the home where they live. (Tr. 56-58.) 
 
 The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, delinquent home mortgage loan. In 2004, shortly after Applicant 
retired from the Marine Corps, he purchased a home for $290,000, with no money 
down. His monthly payments were about $1,958 per month. In 2008, he refinanced the 
loan and took out all his equity of $110,000. He paid off some bills and spent the 
remainder on items that were “consumer in nature.” (Tr. 78-81.) 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted that his payments on this 
mortgage were past due in the amount of $66,610. His March 2013 CBR reflects that 
the last activity on this debt was in March 2012. (GX 2 at 4.) In his answer to the SOR, 
he stated that he contacted the lender in December 2012 to explore his options for 
resolving the debt. He was unsuccessful in obtaining a loan modification. (Tr. 93.) In 
3 
 
March 2013, he listed his home for sale, but was unable to sell it for its appraised value 
of $349,000. After about nine months, he received a short-sale offer of $310,000. In July 
2014, the lender rejected the short-sale offer and initiated foreclosure action. The house 
is vacant and is “real estate owned.” (Tr. 78.) The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, delinquent home equity loan. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted that payments on this loan were past due for about $1,475. The March 2013 
CBR reflects this account was opened in March 2007, and that it is past due more than 
120 days for $1,545. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he is paying $302 per 
month on this debt. His budget provides for monthly payments of $303. (AX T.) His May 
2014 CBR reflects that a payment plan started in March 2014. (GX 3 at 2.) In his post-
hearing submission, Applicant stated that the collection agency for this debt confirmed 
his monthly payments, but he did not submit any documentation of payments. (AX S.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, delinquent credit card account. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted that this debt was charged off for about $5,497, as alleged. The 
March 2013 CBR reflects that the account was opened in December 2006 and charged 
off for $11,441 in October 2012 (GX 2 at 5.) His budget provides for monthly payments 
of $200 on this debt. (AX T.) On November 28, 2014, this debt was paid in full. (AX V.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, delinquent jewelry store account. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted that this debt was charged off for $4,657. His May 2014 CBR 
reflected that this account was opened in August 2011 and was charged off in August 
2013. (GX 3 at 2.) His monthly budget provides for paying $388 per month on this debt 
and paying it off in May 2015. (AX T.) However, at the hearing, Applicant testified that 
he was not sure of the status of this debt and admitted that he had not begun making 
payments on it. (Tr. 100-01.) He has been in contact with a collection attorney but was 
unable to submit a written payment agreement by the time the record closed. (AX S.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, delinquent furniture store account. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted that this debt was charged off for about $3,206. His May 2014 CBR 
reflected that this debt was charged off in November 2013. His monthly budget provides 
for monthly payments of $350 on this debt. He has a payment agreement with the 
collection agency by which he will pay the debt in full by March 20, 2015. (AX W.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, state tax lien. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt. 
The lien is reflected as unsatisfied on his March 2013 and May 2014 CBRs. (GX 2 at 4; 
GX 3 at 5.) Applicant testified that the lien was erroneously imposed, because it was for 
state income taxes in 2003, which he was not required to pay while on active duty. He 
was not aware of the lien until he was asked about it during the processing of his most 
recent SCA. He challenged it and submitted evidence of his military service to the state 
tax authorities. (Tr. 50-51.) In June 2014, the lien was released. (AX C.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he is not proud of his conduct from about mid-2010 
through 2012. (Tr. 52.) He admitted spending recklessly, being involved in “relationships 
that maybe weren’t relationships, but a lot of money was being spent on them.” (Tr. 86-
4 
 
87.) He admitted living beyond his means. (Tr. 91.) The delinquent jewelry store 
account in SOR ¶ 1.d was the product of one of his failed relationships, and the jewelry 
was not returned to him when the relationship ended. (Tr. 101.) 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was engaged, and he obtained a $30,000 personal loan to buy 
an engagement ring. He did not marry his fiancée, who returned the ring, but he is still 
making monthly payments of $705 on the loan. The payments are current, and 
Applicant expects to pay off the loan in February 2015. (Tr. 87-88; GX 2 at 5; AX T.)  
 
 Applicant’s son began attending a community college in 2010, and Applicant paid 
his tuition, totaling about $10,000. After two years, his son transferred to a major 
university, is in his final year of a three-year degree program, and lives independently. 
(Tr. 57.) 
 
 Applicant’s daughter was married in April 2012, and he spent $20,000 for her 
wedding, in five installments. At the $20,000 point, he told his daughter that he could not 
spend any more on her wedding. At this point, he could not use his credit cards 
because he was “robbing one to pay for another.” (Tr. 57, 84-85.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a time-share property in early 2013. Their initial 
deposit of $3,000 is being paid at $550 per month, and it will be paid in full in March 
2015. In addition, they pay a monthly maintenance fee of $235 under a 15-year 
contract. They have never used the property. (Tr. 66-69.) 
 
 In August 2014, Applicant’s employer received a notice of tax lien and demand 
for payment of state taxes in the amount of $159.26. Applicant determined that debt 
arose from his miscalculation of his 2012 state income taxes. Rather than risk a double 
payment by remitting the amount due to the state tax office, Applicant decided to allow 
the wage garnishment to run its course, and the amount due was deducted from his pay 
in September 2014. (GX 5; AX B; AX X.) This tax lien is not alleged in the SOR.1  
 
 Applicant has not sought or received financial counseling. (Tr. 109.) His net 
monthly income is about $8,427, including $2,900 in military retired pay. His wife is not 
employed outside the home. (Tr. 62.) His monthly debt payments total about $3,519. He 
has monthly payments of $784 for a 2010 luxury car, and it will be paid off in March 
2015. His monthly household expenses total about $3,118. He deposits $500 per month 
in his and his wife’s joint checking account, gives his son and his daughter $200 per 
month, and gives his wife $400 per month as discretionary money. According to his 
budget, he and his wife should have a net monthly remainder of about $491. His 
monthly remainder will increase to $3,506 in June 2015, if he adheres to his plan to pay 
off two credit card accounts, three personal loans, a car loan, a furniture bill, the time-
                                                          
1 Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide 
whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, 
or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have 
considered the evidence of the state tax lien for these limited purposes. 
5 
 
share deposit, and the jewelry store debt. (AX T.) He has about $8,984 in his retirement 
account. (AX Z.) 
 
 Applicant earned about $76,000 per year when he first began working for his 
current employer. Over the years, he has received several promotions and pay raises, 
increasing his annual pay to about $104,000. (Tr. 107-08.) Applicant’s performance 
appraisals for the periods ending in September 2009 and September 2011 through 
September 2013 rated him as “fully satisfactory.” Each performance appraisal rated him 
in five categories, and in each he was rated as “fully satisfactory” in two categories and 
“exceeds expectations” in three categories. (AX G through AX J.) He did not submit a 
performance appraisal for period ending in September 2010. A retired Marine Corps 
colonel submitted a letter describing Applicant as highly professional, trustworthy, rule-
abiding, and sensitive to private and classified information. (AX D.) Applicant received a 
letter of appreciation in December 2013 for his performance during installation of 
improved weapons systems on deployed warships. (AX E.) 
 
When Applicant submitted his SCA in March 2013, he did not disclose any of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He answered “No” to questions asking if, during 
the last seven years, he had defaulted on any loan; had any bills or debts turned over to 
a collection agency; had any accounts or credit cards suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or had been more than 120 days delinquent on 
any debt. He also answered “No” to a question whether he was currently more than 120 
days delinquent on any debt. His March 2013 credit bureau report (CBR) (GX 2) 
reflected a real estate mortgage in foreclosure, with the last activity in March 2012 and 
past-due payments totaling about $66,610 (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a); payments on a 
home-equity line of credit that were more than 120 days past due (alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b); a credit-card account charged off for $11,441 in October 2012 (alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c); and a state tax lien for $2,247, filed in February 2008 (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f).  
 
Applicant testified that he answered “No” to all the financial questions because 
the severity of his financial problems was not clear to him when he submitted the SCA. 
He hoped to sell his house and resolve the debt related to it. He testified that he did not 
know that foreclosure had been initiated. He admitted that some of his house payments 
were late, but he was trying hard to avoid being more than 30 days late. He testified that 
he did not disclose the delinquent line of credit because he was making payments on it. 
(Tr. 92-96.) He offered no specific explanation for not disclosing the credit card account 
that was charged off for $11,441 in October 2012. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
6 
 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
7 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a delinquent home mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.a), a delinquent 
home-equity line of credit (SOR ¶ 1.b), a delinquent credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.c), a 
delinquent jewelry store account (SOR ¶ 1.d), a delinquent furniture store account (SOR 
¶ 1.e), and an unsatisfied state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.f). The concern under this guideline is 
set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, CBRs, and testimony at the hearing regarding SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.e establish three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”); and AG ¶ 19(e) (“consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
8 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. The real estate market conditions in March 
2013, when Applicant listed his home for sale, were circumstances largely 
beyond his control, but they were not the cause of his financial problems. 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts because of his irresponsible spending 
during 2010 through 2012. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling and his financial problems are not yet under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially established. Applicant has resolved the credit card 
account in SOR ¶ 1.c and established a payment plan for the furniture store debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.f. The evidence 
establishes that the lien was erroneously filed and that it was released after 
Applicant demonstrated that he was not required to pay state income tax 
because he was on active duty.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by deliberately failing to 
disclose the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
9 
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance since 1982 and is familiar with the 
clearance process and the need for candor in matters of national security. He began 
experiencing difficulty making his house payments in March 2012, and he contacted the 
lender to explore options. By the time he submitted his SCA in March 2013, his past-
due payments totaled $66,610. His CBR’s reflect that his monthly payments were 
$1,947. Recognizing that a substantial portion of that amount is likely attributable to 
interest and penalties, it clearly represents a large number of missed payments. Thus, I 
find Applicant’s statement that he did not know the severity of his financial problems 
implausible and unpersuasive. The evidence suggests that Applicant hoped that he 
could sell the house and resolve the past-due payments before his SCA was 
adjudicated. I find that he deliberately did not disclose the past-due payments on his 
home mortgage loan that were alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s testimony that he continued to make payments on 
the delinquent line of credit alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was plausible and credible. The loan 
was not charged off and the lender continued to accept his payments. 
 
 Applicant offered no explanation for not disclosing the delinquent credit card 
account in SOR ¶ 1.c. He testified that at the time of his daughter’s wedding in March 
2012 he had exhausted his credit-card resources. The large amount that was charged 
off ($11,441) and the timing of the charge-off action (five or six months before the SCA 
was submitted) indicate that Applicant was aware of this delinquent debt and 
deliberately did not disclose it. 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e were not reflected in Applicant’s March 
2013 CBR. Both debts were not charged off until several months after Applicant 
submitted his SCA. I am satisfied that he did not deliberately omit them from his SCA. 
 
 Based on the evidence regarding the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, I 
conclude that the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is established. The following 
mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
10 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. There is no evidence that Applicant made any 
attempts to correct his SCA before he received the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsifications were not minor, because 
they undermined the integrity of the security clearance process. They were recent, 
because they occurred in his most recent SCA. They were arguably infrequent, because 
there is no evidence of other instances of falsification. They did not occur under unique 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant fully disclosed the breadth and depth of his 
financial problems in his response to the SOR and at the hearing. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
11 
 
 
 This is a tragic case. Applicant has served his country with distinction for many 
years, both in and out of uniform. He is deeply devoted to his children. His purchase of 
a home in 2004 with 100% financing was risky, but understandable in light of market 
conditions at that time. However, his irresponsible behavior appears to have begun 
when he refinanced his home, withdrew $110,000, and squandered it on an expensive 
car, expensive jewelry, and other items that he did not describe in detail. His financial 
support of his son’s education and his daughter’s wedding is understandable, but he 
failed to put reasonable limits on his spending until his resources were exhausted. His 
purchase of a time-share property that he has never used, at a time when he was 
already in financial distress, is difficult to reconcile with his military record of responsible 
and distinguished conduct. His familiarity with the security clearance process and his 
service as a Marine Corps officer made him aware of the need for candor, but his 
embarrassment over his bad financial judgment and his concerns about retaining his job 
appear to have prevailed. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:2     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s failure to disclose the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c is resolved against him. His failure to 
disclose the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e is resolved in his favor. 
12 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
