 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02449 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position in the defense industry. Although Applicant has a 
willingness to repay the delinquent debts she accumulated after years of financial 
mismanagement, she has not articulated a plan to do so. She has also failed to 
demonstrate a track record of financial rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, her request 
for access to sensitive information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on November 18, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted AE E through O, which were also admitted without objection.3 I 
received the transcript (Tr.) on November 28, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 27, has worked as a customer service representative team leader for a 
federal contractor since February 2013. She is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a 
position of public trust for her job working in a call center. Eligibility is necessary 
because her job involves access to personally identifiable information (PII). On her 
February 2013 electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP), Applicant 
disclosed a number of financial issues. The ensuing investigation revealed and the SOR 
alleges that the Applicant is indebted to 11 creditors for approximately $21,000; that 
Applicant failed to file her state and federal income tax returns for 2008, 2010, and 
2011; and that Applicant owes at least $847 in outstanding federal income taxes.4  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when she started living on her own at 18 
years old. Applicant testified that she did not have the knowledge to manage her 
finances responsibly. She admits that many of the debts alleged in the SOR as well as 
her failure to file and pay her federal income taxes were the result of her financial 
immaturity and irresponsibility. Although Applicant has not sought any financial 
counseling, she testified that she is trying to repay her delinquent accounts.5  
 
Applicant provided receipts and bank statements to establish that she is making 
payments towards the debts alleged in the SOR. However, the documentation clearly 
establishes that only six of the alleged SOR debts have been addressed in some 
fashion. Specifically, Applicant’s documents show: that her student loans, SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
($2,144) and 1.d ($4,041), are in forbearance status until June 2015; that the accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($365) and 1.i ($403) do not belong to Applicant and were 
erroneously reported to her credit file; that she has paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j 
($600) and 1.k ($131); and that she has made at least one payment of $120 toward the 
resolution of SOR ¶ 1.g ($324). Applicant offered a document purporting to show that 
the account in SOR ¶ 1.f ($344), which is for an overdrawn checking account, has been 
resolved. Upon questioning Applicant admitted that she did not pay the balance, but that 
the creditor wrote off the account because it is more than seven years old. Based on the 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s Exhibits are included in the record as HE II.  
 
4 GE 1, 4-5. 
 
5 Tr. 17-18, 20, 56-57. 
 
 
3 
 
record, the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.b, 1.e-1.g, and 1.l-1.m remain 
unresolved.6  
 
Applicant also claims that she has been making payments toward other debts. 
Applicant has resolved a non-SOR judgment ($1,800) and a delinquent debt owed to a 
cable company ($900). On the bank statements Applicant provided showing her 
spending activity from April to November 2014, she highlighted recurring payments to 
unidentified creditors. However, she did not provide any explanation linking the 
payments to particular SOR or non-SOR debts, and the creditors are not readily 
identifiable from the transaction descriptions. Applicant most recent credit report, dated 
October 2014, shows that she accumulated another $4,900 in delinquent debt during 
2014.7 
 
Applicant admits that she did not file her federal or state income taxes for the 
years 2008, 2010, and 2011. Applicant testified that although she had her outstanding 
federal and state income tax returns recently prepared by a third party, she did not know 
if the returns were filed or if she had an outstanding federal or state income tax liability. 
The day after the hearing, Applicant contacted the IRS and learned that she owes 
$4,000 in outstanding taxes for the 2007 and 2013 tax years. Applicant plans to pay the 
balance in full in January 2015. Applicant also presented evidence that she has an 
outstanding state tax liability for $840 for an unspecified tax year, but offered no details 
on how she plans to resolve the debt. Applicant did not provide any additional 
information regarding the status of her federal or state income tax filings or liabilities for 
the years alleged in the SOR.8  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”9 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”10 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right 
to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.11 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, 
                                                          
6 Tr. 21-27, 31-40; AE A-D, F. 
  
7 AE E, I-J, and L.  
 
8 Tr. 28, 40-46, 53-54; AE G-H. 
 
9 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
10 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
11 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
and commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious trustworthiness concern because failure 
to “satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive 
information.”12 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. 
  
The record establishes that Applicant is indebted to 11 creditors for 
approximately $21,000. Applicant’s admissions as well as the credit reports in the 
record establish the government’s prima facie case. Applicant has demonstrated an 
inability to pay her bills and a history of financial problems resulting in unresolved 
delinquent debts.13 Applicant also admits failing to file her federal and state tax returns 
for a number of years including 2008, 2010, and 2011 as well owing federal taxes, 
which is also disqualifying.14 Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate 
the security concerns raised by her history of financial mismanagement.  
 
Applicant admits that her financial problems were largely of her own making. 
Although she takes responsibility for her past acts of financial mismanagement and 
irresponsibility, she has not taken steps to show financial rehabilitation or reform. She 
                                                          
12  AG ¶ 18. 
 
13 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
14 AG ¶ 19(g). 
 
5 
 
has not obtained financial counseling. She is not able to articulate a plan for resolving 
her delinquent debts. While Applicant’s bank statements show that she is making 
recurring payments on some accounts, this is not enough to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns raised by her history of financial problems. She may well be able to timely pay 
her car note and insurance for example, but it does not negate or diminish the evidence 
in the record that she is unable to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
Also of concern is Applicant’s inability to provide information regarding the status 
of her federal and state income tax obligations. Her initial failure to file raises issues 
about her ability to following rules and regulations and serves as a basis for an adverse 
decision on its own. However, her ongoing inability to correct the issue and meet her 
most basic obligation to the government casts doubts on her suitability to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public 
trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Ultimately, Applicant did not meet her burdens of production or 
persuasion to merit a favorable decision in this case. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial 
stability necessary to obtain a public trust position in the future. Rather, it is recognition 
of the fact that financial issues have historically been a motivating factor behind acts of 
espionage and the poor financial history of those seeking public trust positions cannot 
be ignored. However, it must also be noted that the award of a public trust position is 
not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both 
disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. While a favorable decision is not 
warranted at this time, Applicant may well present persuasive evidence of financial 
rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b, 1.e-1.g, and 1.l-1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d, and 1.h-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Her eligibility to 
occupy a position of public trust is denied.  
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
