 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03572 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Redacted], Esq. 
 
 
January 23, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Based on a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial Considerations. His request 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 13, 
 
2 
 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 13, 2014, scheduling the hearing for December 9, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 18, 2014. The record was left 
open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On January 4, 2015, Applicant 
presented five additional exhibits marked AE E through AE I. On January 13, 2015, 
Applicant presented one document marked AE J. On January 20, 2015, Applicant 
presented AE K. Department Counsel had no objections to AE E through AE K and they 
were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since March 2014. He is married and has a 16-year-old son. He 
possesses a Master’s in Business Administration, awarded in 1999. (GE 1; Tr. 86.)  
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted on 11 delinquent 
accounts in the approximate total amount of $36,063. Applicant admitted all of the debts 
listed in the SOR subparagraphs, with explanations. His debts are found in the credit 
reports entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant has been struggling financially due to periods of unemployment and 
unexpected medical emergencies. Applicant’s wife has been on medical disability since 
2004 due to fibromyalgia and peripheral neuropathy. In February 2009 Applicant’s wife 
had surgery that did not heal properly and led to costly medical bills. They were able to 
make payments on all of their debts at that time, but realized that their bills were 
mounting. They attempted to reduce their expenditures. In September 2009 Applicant 
incurred additional financial difficulties when he was laid off from his job. He was out of 
work for two months. When he found another job, it was out of state and only paid 70% 
of Applicant’s prior salary. The job also did not provide medical benefits to Applicant’s 
spouse or son, both of whom required continuous medical care and costly prescriptions. 
Applicant commuted 300 miles per day to that job. He had no extra money to pay on 
delinquencies, but attempted to stay current on his bills. (GE 1; AE F; AE Tr. 23-47.) 
 
In November 2010 Applicant was hired at another company, for a better salary. 
He moved his family out of their home and into an apartment near his new job. He 
planned to lease his family home to renters or sell it, but it was vandalized beyond what 
Applicant could afford to repair after his family moved out. His wife fell severely ill in 
April 2011 and required hospitalization. In May 2011 Applicant was again laid off. He 
was unable to find work until September 2011. He worked at that job from September 
2011 to January 2012, when he was laid off a third time. He was employed from 
February 2012 to October 2012, but was then laid off a fourth time. He was hired by a 
subcontractor into his current position in April 2013 and became a permanent employee 
of the Government contractor in March 2014. During the period he was a subcontractor, 
 
3 
 
his wife and son lived in another state and Applicant incurred the additional costs of 
maintaining two residences. Once he was hired permanently, his family joined him, 
relieving him of the financial burden of maintaining two residences. His current position 
fully covers Applicant and his family with health insurance. (Answer; GE 1; AE A; AE F; 
AE G; AE H; AE I; Tr. 23-47.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he was in communication with his creditors, despite his 
delinquencies, and always intended to repay his accounts. He made payments to his 
creditors when he could. He closed all of his credit card accounts and elected only to 
pay cash for purchases. He sold clothing at consignment shops to get money to pay 
bills. (Tr. 26-27, 42-44, 74.) He further testified: 
 
Once we -- due to all the bills -- trying to make the bills, I sold my wedding 
ring. My wife sold her wedding ring. We sold all of our gold. One of my 
fillings came out and I went and got it cleaned and sold that so we could 
make enough money to pay back doctors' bills, as well as trying to make 
payments on whatever debt we did have at that time. (Tr. 41.) 
 
While Applicant previously addressed five other accounts, as reflected by his 
credit reports, he did not have the funds to address his SOR-listed debts until recently. 
Once he had obtained a permanent job in March 2014, and his family moved in with him 
alleviating the need to maintain two residences, he immediately enlisted the help of his 
brother, an attorney, to contact each of his creditors to arrange repayment. Applicant 
has repaid or made payment arrangements on all of his delinquent debts listed on the 
SOR. (Tr. 81-82.) He testified that as individual debts are repaid, he intends to increase 
the amounts of his payments to pay off his remaining debts faster. (Tr. 78-81.) The 
statuses of his SOR-listed accounts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on two store credit accounts, held by the same creditor, in 
the approximate amounts of $1,251 and $4,919, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
These debts have been delinquent since August 2012 and August 2010, respectively. 
Applicant testified that the creditor merged both debts into one account for repayment. 
Applicant arranged to pay this creditor $50 per month until these debts are satisfied. He 
presented documentation that shows he made two payments to this creditor and intends 
to continue his monthly payments until these debts are paid in full. These debts are 
being resolved. (GE 2; AE A; AE C; AE K; Tr. 48-50.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the approximate 
amount of $4,448, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt has been past due since March 
2014. Applicant presented a written settlement agreement, dated November 7, 2014, 
with this creditor to repay a total of $1,500 at the rate of $125 per month. Applicant 
documented that he made payments in November 2014 and December 2014 to this 
creditor. He intends to continue making payments, per the agreement, until this debt is 
satisfied. This debt is being resolved. (GE 2; GE 3; AE A; AE C; AE G; Tr. 50-54.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent medical account in the approximate amount 
of $460, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt has been past due since July 2009. 
 
4 
 
Applicant testified that this creditor agreed to accept $52 per month, until the debt is 
satisfied. Applicant made his first payment on November 12, 2014, as shown on his 
bank statement. He made a second $52 payment on December 30, 2014. This debt is 
being resolved. (GE 2; AE A; AE C; AE G; Tr. 54-55.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent cable account in the approximate amount 
of $53, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt has been past due since February 2014. 
Applicant paid this debt in full on November 5, 2014, as reflected on his bank statement. 
(GE 2; AE D; Tr. 56-58.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent vehicle loan in the approximate amount of 
$20,360, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt has been past due since February 2010. 
The debt represents the remainder owed for the vehicle he voluntarily returned after his 
wife became sick and he was laid off in 2009. On November 25, 2014, Applicant 
negotiated a settlement agreement with this creditor. The creditor reduced the debt to 
$5,090.21, payable through a down payment of $292.09 and 23 subsequent monthly 
payments of approximately $212. Applicant credibly averred that he made a money 
order payment to this creditor on December 23, 2014. This debt is being resolved. (GE 
2; AE A; AE C; Tr. 59-60.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$272, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt has been past due since February 2011. 
Applicant reached a written settlement agreement with this creditor and paid the 
settlement amount of $149.98 on November 11, 2014. He provided a copy of his bank 
statement to verify the payment to this creditor. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; AE A; AE 
C; Tr. 60-61.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$521, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. This debt has been past due since February 2014. In 
September 2014 Applicant agreed to pay this debt at the rate of $50 per month until it 
was satisfied in full. He has successfully made his monthly payments to this creditor 
since September 2014, as documented in his bank statements. This debt is being 
resolved. (GE 2; AE C; AE G; Tr. 62-63.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$1,062, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt has been past due since March 2014. 
Applicant presented a settlement agreement with this creditor, dated December 12, 
2014. It shows that the creditor agreed to settle the debt for six payments of $70.84 to 
be made January 13, 2015 through June 13, 2015. This debt is being resolved. (GE 2; 
AE A; AE G.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$2,599, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. This debt has been past due since November 2010. In 
November 2014 Applicant agreed to settle this debt for payments of $333 per month, for 
three months. He provided documentation that he made each of the payments, as 
agreed upon. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; AE A; AE C; AE J; AE K; Tr. 70-72.) 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent medical account in the approximate 
amount of $118, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. This debt has been past due since October 
2013. Applicant resolved this debt on November 13, 2014, as documented on 
Applicant’s bank statement. (GE 2; AE A; AE C; Tr. 72-73.) 
 
Applicant has participated in formal credit counseling, in addition to the legal 
services and counseling provided by his brother. He has met on-line with a counselor 
four times. The counseling service helped him create a budget and taught him how to 
live through cash-only payments. He provided a personal financial questionnaire that 
was created with the aid of a financial counselor as documentation of his participation in 
financial counseling. (AE G; Tr. 86-88.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by those that know him. His brother testified that 
Applicant is “the most honest, straightforward, honorable person [he has] ever met. He 
is a wonderful husband, a wonderful father, a fantastic brother, son, uncle.” (Tr. 94.) 
Applicant’s “Lead” at his employment with the Government contractor wrote a letter on 
Applicant’s behalf that recognized Applicant for his professionalism, candor, and drive 
for quality and excellence. Another co-worker, in a letter of support, indicated Applicant 
is deeply loyal to the United States and would never do anything contrary to the security 
interests of the United States. Applicant’s 2014 performance review shows that he 
consistently exceeds his employer’s expectations. (AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
6 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2009 when his wife was 
undergoing extensive medical treatment and he subsequently was laid off from his job. 
He stopped making payments on his debts when he could not make ends meet. He has 
a history of debt that he was unable to resolve for a five-year period. The evidence 
 
7 
 
raises security concerns under both of these conditions, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
  Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on delinquencies that result from events that an applicant 
could not control. Several events affected Applicant’s ability to maintain financial 
solvency, including his wife’s medical problems and his periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. These events made it difficult for Applicant to live within his means. 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and addressed bills when he 
could. He is either repaying or has fully repaid each of his debts. Under the 
circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Applicant sought financial guidance and counseling about how to handle the 
debts from his brother, an attorney, and through independent financial counseling. 
Applicant's debts are under control, as they are either being repaid or have been repaid. 
Moreover, Applicant is employed, and has medical insurance for himself and his family. 
Applicant brought his financial situation under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial difficulties were caused by factors that were beyond his control. He is an 
honorable man and diligently tried to resolve his debts through any honest means 
possible, including selling his personal possessions. Applicant has resolved or is 
resolving all of his delinquent debt. He has participated in financial counseling. He now 
lives frugally. He does not have any credit cards. It is unlikely that Applicant will incur 
future financial problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person analysis for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
