KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has demonstrated error.  The appropriate resolution is to return the case for
the Judge remedy the error.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 14-00509.a1
DATE: 01/13/2015
DATE: January 13, 2015
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00509
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 17, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
2
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On September 30, 2014, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent
with the following, we remand the case to the Judge.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant graduated from college in August 2012.  He began a position with a Defense
contractor in June 2012.  In October 2013 he submitted a security clearance application (SCA).
Applicant began using marijuana in September 2008, while he was in college.   He continued using
marijuana until April 2013, while he was working for a Defense contractor.  He purchased marijuana
from November 2010 until December 2011.  He stated that, while in college, he used marijuana
infrequently and for recreational purposes.  He claims that he has not used marijuana for over a year.
In his response to the File of Relevant Material, Applicant stated that he has continued to abstain
from using marijuana and would agree to an automatic revocation of his clearance should he abuse
illegal drugs in the future.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s drug use raised security concerns.  In resolving the
Guideline H concerns adversely to Applicant, she stated that he had used marijuana “for ten months
(June 2012-April 2013) while employed as a Defense contractor.”  Decision at 5.  She said that it
is unclear whether his motivation to stop using was his completion of his SCA.  She also noted that
Applicant has not received substance abuse treatment, and the record contains no evidence regarding
whether Applicant continues to frequent places where he used marijuana.  In her whole-person
analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant had used marijuana on multiple occasions between 2008
and 2013.  “That period included six months while he was working for a [D]efense contractor.”  Id.
at 6.  She stated that his favorable evidence was not enough to outweigh evidence that he used
marijuana for five years, purchased it for a year, continued using it after being employed by a
Defense contractor, and did not stop using it until six months before completing his SCA.
Applicant’s drug use was also alleged under Guideline E, which the Judge resolved in his favor.  
Discussion
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2
1Record evidence reflects that Applicant was not employed on or about June 2012.  The SCA states that in June
2012 Applicant was attending college.  Item 4 at 15.  See also Item 5, Personal Subject Interview, at 1-2:  [Applicant]
“was a full-time student at [college] from 09/2010 through 06/2011 and 08/2011 through 09/2012 and was not
employed.”     
3
¶ 2(b).  In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, the Board will review
the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to
articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  We examine
a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same
record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
Applicant contends that the Judge failed properly to examine the record evidence.
Specifically, he alleges that she erred in finding that he had begun working for a Defense contractor
in June 2012.  He stated that he did not begin working for his employer until June 2013.  We find
this argument persuasive.  
In this case, the only evidence of Applicant’s start date for his current job is his SCA.
Section 13A of this document states that he has worked for his employer from June 2013 to the
present.  Item 4 at 12.  His start date is addressed nowhere else in the record.1  The Judge’s findings
that Applicant had begun working in June 2012 and, consequently, that he used marijuana for
several months while employed by a Defense contractor, are not supported by record evidence.  Due
to the emphasis that the Judge placed on these findings, we are not able to say that the errors are
harmless. 
 Accordingly, we conclude that the best resolution is to remand the case to the Judge for a
new decision.  The other issues raised by Applicant are not ripe for consideration at this time.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
