 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00666 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Ans.) on June 24, 2014, and requested a hearing. 
The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge on July 25, 2014, but 
was reassigned to me on August 21, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 26, 2014, setting the hearing 
for October 9, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence. GE 3 and AE 4 were admitted over Applicant’s objections. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified, called a witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 
20, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and has worked as a communication specialist for five 
years. He is a high school graduate who has completed some college courses. He has 
been married for 12 years and has two children. He served in the Army for eight years, 
including serving three combat tours in Afghanistan and Iraq where he received the 
Bronze Star for his actions, among many other decorations. He received an honorable 
discharge in the pay grade of E-6. He held a secret clearance while serving in the 
Army.1  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was indebted on a mortgage account in the 
approximate amount of $97,144, which resulted in foreclosure of the property. The debt 
was listed on credit reports dated November 2013 and July 2014. Applicant admitted 
the debt. That admission is incorporated into these findings of fact.2  
 
 In April 2009, while Applicant was serving his last deployment, he and his wife 
purchased a home in his wife’s hometown. Once Applicant returned from his 
deployment and separated from the Army, he intended to move to this location and find 
employment. Applicant’s wife’s parents lived just a few blocks away from the recently 
purchased home. In February 2011, Applicant’s in-laws began harassing Applicant’s 
family. The harassment took the form of threatening notes, emails, phone calls, and text 
messages. The in-laws would constantly drive by Applicant’s house during all hours of 
the day and night. Applicant finally contacted the police about the harassment and was 
told to seek a restraining order from the court against the in-laws. Applicant’s wife 
petitioned the court for a restraining order in July 2011, which was granted. Even though 
a restraining order was granted, Applicant did not feel that his family was safe at their 
current location, so he began searching for a new home.3   
 
 Applicant found a home about ten miles outside town, and in May 2012, he 
purchased the property. He also put his existing home up for sale. It was on the market 
for about one year before he purchased the new home, but it did not sell. In order not to 
lose the new home, Applicant purchased it without selling his first home. He decided to 
rent the first home. His mortgage payment on this property was $1,000 per month. He 
attracted some tenants to rent the property for $800 per month. The tenants did not pay 
the full amount of rent from the very beginning, and eventually stopped paying rent 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 16, 28-31; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-4; Ans. 
 
3 Tr. at 32-35; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
altogether. Eight months later, the renters abandoned the property after causing 
signifcant damage.4 
 
 With no rental income, Applicant was having difficulty paying both mortgages. He 
sought a mortgage loan modification from his original lender for his first home. He was 
informed that the loan had been sold and he should contact the new mortgage holder. 
He did so, and has supporting documentation showing his communication with the 
mortgage holder about obtaining a modification dated August 2013, well before the 
SOR was issued. Applicant provided documents showing his ongoing efforts to seek a 
modification from the mortgage holder that run from August 2013 through June 2014. 
He was never informed by the lender that he did not qualify for a modification. At some 
point, (record is silent) Applicant contacted a realtor about the possibility of short-selling 
the property. The realtor advised that Applicant first needed to repair the tenant-caused 
damage and then they could put the house on the market for a short sale. Before he 
could effectuate the repairs, his wife became ill and he was unable to proceed further. 
He received formal notice of the foreclosure in February 2014. The property sold 
through foreclosure for $70,000. He originally purchased the property for $117,000, of 
which his mortgage amount was $105,000. After the foreclosure, he contacted the 
mortgage holder about the status of any deficiency liability he may have. He was told to 
wait to receive an IRS form 1099 indicating a cancellation of debt. As of the hearing 
date, he has not received a form 1099, or any notice of deficiency.5 
 
 Applicant is current on his existing mortgage and on all his other obligations. His 
current mortgage balance is $104,000 and his monthly payment is about $700. His wife 
owns a small business that operates at the break-even point.6  
 
 Applicant was supported by the testimony of his supervisor. He characterized 
him as a highly trustworthy and reliable person with great integrity. He recommended 
that he retain his security clearance. Additionally, another supervisor wrote a supporting 
letter for him. She also states that in her six years of working with him, he has been a 
trustworthy and reliable employee. He received a quarterly award (January-March 2010) 
and an annual award (January 2011) from his employer for outstanding job 
performance. He also received a glowing recommendation from his military commander 
and presented his last three years of Army evaluation reports reflecting he was 
considered an overall “superior” solder.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 35-36, 54, 58, 60. 
 
5 Tr. at 37-36, 41, 43-44, 51; AE A, C. 
 
6 Tr. at 44, 58, 68; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 70-73; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had a delinquent real estate debt that resulted in a foreclosure sale. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The foreclosure sale was recent. Since he is current on his home mortgage and 
has no other delinquent debts in other areas of his life, it is reasonable to conclude that 
 
6 
 
this type of debt will not recur, nor does it cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Although Applicant’s decision to purchase a second property without selling his 
first home was a financial decision within his control, the harassment from his in-laws, 
which necessitated the move and having tenants that defaulted on rent and caused 
extensive property damage to the house in question were conditions beyond his control. 
He acted responsibly by seeking a loan modification from the mortgage holder and by 
seeking information on pursuing a short sale. He provided documentation showing his 
continuous correspondence with the mortgage holder about trying to qualify for a 
modification well before the SOR issued. After the foreclosure, he also contacted the 
mortgage holder about his potential responsibilities for any deficiency that could result 
from the foreclosure sale. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There is no evidence in the record concerning any financial counseling, but the 
property sold through foreclosure, and there is no evidence that Applicant is liable for 
any deficiency from the sale. The mortgage holder informed him that he should receive 
a Form 1099 cancelling the debt. The evidence supports a determination that the debt 
has been resolved and that he made good-faith efforts to resolve the debt. AG ¶ 20(c) 
and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his 
debt liability. I also considered his military record, including his multiple combat tours 
and his decorations, including the Bronze Star. He is well thought of by his supervisors 
and was described as trustworthy and a man of integrity. He found himself in a situation 
that led to him purchasing a second home to remove a threat to his family, even though 
this action ultimately caused his financial distress when he could not sell the first home 
and he suffered financially because of untrustworthy and unreliable tenants. I found 
nothing to indicate a likelihood that Applicant would find himself in a similar future 
situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph   1.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
