 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02647 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On October 1, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On December 1, 2014, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on 
December 18, 2014, and was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on January 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a in part and denied the remaining 
allegations. The admission is incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old, married, and the father of three children. He served in 
the Navy from 1994 to 1998 and received an honorable discharge. While in the Navy he 
held a security clearance. He has worked for his present employer since 2000.  
 
 Applicant experienced financial problems when he was unable to secure renters 
for an investment property he owned. He fell behind on the mortgage payments for the 
investment property in December 2013. He pursued a short sale on the property. Two 
contracts for short sale fell through. The third contract was completed in October 2014. 
He provided documentation of the sale and confirmation that the loan was paid in full 
and the lien on the property was released. Applicant resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.1  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is for Applicant’s mortgage loan on his primary residence. 
He indicated he made consistent payments on the mortgage loan, except in January 
2014, when he fell behind. The following month he caught up his payments and the 
account is current. He provided supporting documents.2 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he was past due in early 2014 in the amount of $142 for 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He was using a debt consolidation program to make the payment 
on this account and learned in May 2014 that the debt consolidation payment was not 
covering the minimum payment required. Applicant corrected and increased the 
payment to cover the amount and the debt is current. He provided supporting 
documents.3  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was paid in February 2014. Applicant closed the account 
in May 2014. He provided supporting documents.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 Item 3; Response to the FORM with attachments. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
4 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had debts that became delinquent when he had difficulty renting his 
investment property in late 2013. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant fell behind on his investment property mortgage when he had difficulty 
finding tenants. He fell behind one month on his primary residence mortgage. He had 
two other debts that were in a past-due status. Applicant resolved all of his financial 
issues. He completed a short sale on the investment property in October 2014, and 
there is no balance owed. He caught up the following month on his primary residence 
mortgage. He adjusted the payment plan on a consumer debt so his payments would 
cover the monthly minimum, and he paid the amount owed on the final debt and closed 
 
5 
 
 
the account. AG ¶ 20(a) applies because Applicant no longer owns investment property, 
which caused his financial issues. Therefore, future problems are unlikely to recur. His 
difficulty in finding tenants was beyond his control and he acted responsibly by selling 
the property and paying other debts that were delinquent for a short time. Applicant 
resolved his financial problems, and there are clear indications his finances are under 
control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c), and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. He served in the Navy for four years and received an 
honorable discharge. He has had steady employment with the same employer since 
2000. He experienced some financial problems when he had difficulty renting 
investment property he owned. He acted responsibly by selling the property and 
resolving the remaining debts. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
