 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01299 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 22, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on November 12, 2014. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
who received it on November 25, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted 
exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into the record without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on January 6, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.g, 
1.h, 2.a – 2.c, and 3.a. The motion is granted and the SOR is so amended. Despite the 
amendment, the original SOR paragraph numbers will be used in this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied all the allegations, except for his 
admission to ¶ 1.c. That admission is adopted as a finding of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He is separated from his current wife and has been 
divorced twice. He has one child, age nine and one step-child, age 18. He has worked 
for his current employer, a defense contractor, since October 2007. He is a high school 
graduate. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 1974 to 1977 and received a 
general discharge under honorable conditions.1  
  
 The SOR lists a judgment and four delinquent debts that total approximately 
$43,343. These debts are supported by credit reports from December 2012 and March 
2014.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began in 2006 when he made a career change by 
becoming a real estate agent. When his new career did not take off as he expected, he 
began using credit cards to fund his expenses. Quickly, the debts increased, and he 
was unable to keep up with the payments on the credit cards. His wife also changed 
from a full-time job to a part-time position. In 2007, when Applicant was hired for his 
current job, he was slowly able to pay the judgment and debts he had accumulated. The 
status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 2-3. 
 
2 Items 1, 4-5. 
 
3 Item 2; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: 
 
 This is a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $14,463. Applicant 
presented documentation showing his wages were garnished during 2013 and 2014 to 
pay this debt and satisfy the judgment. This debt is resolved.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: 
 
 This is a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $13,225. This account was 
sold to a collection agency. Applicant contacted an attorney who advised him that this 
debt was beyond the statute of limitations and not enforceable. It does not appear on 
Applicant’s credit report from August 2014. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
 This is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of $544.76. Applicant 
presented documentation showing that he paid the debt in May 2013. This debt is 
resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: 
 
 This is a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $3,596. Applicant presented 
documentation showing he arranged a settlement of this debt by making monthly 
payments of $275 per month from June 2012 until May 2013. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: 
 
 This is a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $11,515. Applicant 
presented documentation showing his wages were garnished during 2010 and 2011 to 
pay this debt and satisfy the judgment. This debt is resolved.8 
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR included several years’ worth of job appraisals 
and performance awards from 2008 through 2014. He consistently receives ratings of 
“meets job requirements” and “exceeds job requirement.” He has also received 
performance awards ranging up to $1,000.9 
                                                          
4 Items 2 (p. 4-6), 6.  
 
5 Item 2, AE A, C.  
 
6 Item 2 (p. 7-8).  
 
7 Item 2 (p. 9-20).  
 
8 Items 2 (p. 25-27), 7.  
 
9 Item 2 (p. 21-24, 28-56). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over an extended period of time. I find 
both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He has paid four debts 
and determined that the remaining debt is not enforceable and is not listed on his credit 
report. His efforts to repair his financial position make it reasonable to conclude that 
these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debt when he made a career change that 
reduced his earnings. After a year of accumulating debt, he was hired in his current 
position. His decision to change careers was not a condition beyond his control. AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There are clear indications that all but one of the debts have been resolved 
through payment. Applicant made good-faith efforts to resolve most the debts listed on 
the SOR. Even though two of the debts were resolved because of garnishment actions, 
they took place well before the issuance of the SOR and can be compared to required 
payments under a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He supplied documentary evidence 
showing the payments were made and the debts were paid. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) 
apply.  
 
 He did not address the one debt listed in the SOR that is unenforceable, 
however, a security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There 
is also no requirement that an applicant pay every debt listed in the SOR, only that he 
remove concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness raised by those debts. See 
ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (App. Bd. August 4, 2014). Applicant has taken 
significant action to resolve his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past military 
service and his civilian service, including his job appraisals and performance awards. 
The evidence supports his showing that he is again financially stable. He paid four of 
the debts and determined the last debt is unenforceable. The record contains sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:10   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.g, 1.h, 2.a, 2.b, and 3.a were withdrawn. 
 
