 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ADP Case No. 14-00988 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 17 delinquent collection or 
charged-off debts or judgments totaling $33,571. She failed to provide sufficient 
documentation of her progress resolving her financial problems. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to sensitive information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2013, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 5) On April 30, 2014, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as revised by 
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 30, 2006, which became 
effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive 
information. (Item 1) DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether such access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated October 7, 2014, was provided to her on October 21, 2014.  Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. On December 15, 2014, the case was assigned to me.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f-1.j, 
1.l, and 1.m.2 She denied responsibility for the other SOR debts for various reasons. 
Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old, and she is seeking employment by a defense 
contractor involved with medical records.3 From April 2012 to October 2013, she worked 
as a customer service representative, associate, and technical associate. From August 
2011 to April 2012, she worked as a benefits administrator. From June 2010 to August 
2011, and from June 2007 to August 2009, she was unemployed. From August 2009 to 
June 2010, she worked in bilingual customer service. She attended a community 
college from 2006 to 2007. She has not served in the military. She married in 1992, and 
her children were born in 1992 and 1994. There is no evidence of alcohol or drug 
abuse, or violations of her employment rules.     
 
Financial Considerations4 
  
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her October 24, 2013 SF 
86, two credit reports, and SOR response. Her SOR alleges 17 delinquent collection or 
charged-off debts or judgments totaling $33,571.     
 
 Applicant owed $700 to her landlord, and her landlord obtained a judgment 
against her. (SOR ¶ 1.a) She moved out of her residence; however, her husband 
remained in the rental dwelling. She said she paid her landlord cash in June 2013, 
resolving the debt.   
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s response to the SOR. (Item 4) 
  
3 The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SF 86. (Item 5) 
 
4 The source for the information in this section is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Applicant denied responsibility for the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b for $13,242. (SOR 
¶ 1.b) The debt was being collected for a vehicle Applicant did not own. She requested 
proof from the creditor of her responsibility for the debt; however, the creditor did not 
provide any documentation.  
 
 Applicant said the credit card debt for $639 in SOR ¶ 1.c was paid in 2009 
through garnishment of her pay.  
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($12,152) and 
explained she was going through a separation from her spouse. She planned to resolve 
this debt when able to do so.  
 
 Applicant received some equipment when she opened a telecommunications 
account. (SOR ¶ 1.e ($951)) She closed the account and returned the equipment. 
However, the telecommunications company sought payment for the equipment. The 
telecommunications company is investigating her responsibility for the debt. 
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for the telecommunications debt in SOR ¶ 1.f 
($1,945) which was owed for equipment. The telecommunications company refused to 
accept the equipment, and Applicant said she intended to pay the debt.  
 
 Applicant agreed that she owed $969 to the power company. (SOR ¶ 1.g) She 
moved out of her residence, and her husband remained in the residence. Her husband 
failed to pay the power bill. Applicant said she paid the creditor $50.  
 
 Applicant agreed that she received medical services from the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 
1.h ($931), 1.i ($615), and 1.l ($299). She believed her medical insurance company was 
responsible for paying these bills. On May 5, 2014, she provided her medical insurance 
information to the creditor. At the time she responded to the SOR, she was waiting for 
the creditor to respond to her inquiry about the status of the debts.   
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($468). She said she 
gave her pin to someone who took the funds without her authorization. She intended to 
make a payment in July 2014.  
 
 The three debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k ($391), 1.n ($63), and 1.o ($50) originated from 
the same telecommunications account and are being collected by the same collection 
agent. Applicant contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.k ($391) and verified the debt was 
paid in June 2012. She said the creditor also verified the other two debts were paid or 
satisfied. Applicant contacted the creditor and indicated she intended to pay the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.m ($77) at the end of June 2014.  
 
Applicant called the creditor for the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.p ($41), which was 
based on her husband’s failure to show up for a medical appointment, and the creditor 
agreed to release her from responsibility for the debt. She called the creditor for the 
music-related debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($38), which was based on an order for compact discs, 
and the creditor agreed to release her from responsibility for the debt.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s October 3, 2014 credit report lists negative financial entries relating to 
the following delinquent SOR debts: 1.a judgment for $700; 1.b judgment for $13,242; 
1.f debt for $1,945; 1.g debt for $969; 1.h debt for $931; 1.i debt for $615; 1.n debt for 
$63; 1.o debt for $50; and 1.q debt for $38. (Item 7) The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $12,152 
is listed with a high credit of $12,152 and a past due amount of $6,339. (Item 7)     
 
Applicant did not provide any supporting or corroborating documentation to 
establish her claims of payment or other resolution of any of the SOR debts. She did not 
provide any evidence of financial counseling or of her budget.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
      
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
   
 AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports and hearing record. Applicant’s SOR alleges 17 delinquent collection or 
charged-off debts or judgments totaling $33,571. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990) . . . . After the Government presents evidence raising 
[trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or 
mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard applicable 
in [public trust position] decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. “Any 
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, 
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant is credited with mitigating the following SOR debts: 1.c, 1.e, and 1.j to 
1.q. The following SOR debts are not listed as delinquent, charged off, under collection, 
or as judgments in Applicant’s October 3, 2014 credit report: 1.c, 1.e, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 
1.m. She said the credit card debt for $639 in SOR ¶ 1.c was paid in 2009 through 
garnishment of her pay. She disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($951). She accepted 
responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($468), and she said she was going to pay it. The 
three debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k ($391), 1.n ($63), and 1.o ($50) originated from the same 
telecommunications account; they were being collected by the same collection agent; 
and she said the three debts were resolved. She turned the debt for medical services in 
SOR ¶ 1.l ($299) over to her medical insurance company. Applicant said she intended 
to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($77) at the end of June 2014. The medical debt in SOR ¶ 
1.p ($41) and the music-related debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($38) are for small amounts; she 
states the creditor verbally agreed that the debts were resolved; and obtaining 
documentation from a creditor on such modest debts is unlikely.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f to 
1.i. She did not provide sufficient information about her finances to establish her inability 
to make greater progress paying her creditors. Her underemployment, unemployment 
from June 2010 to August 2011, and from June 2007 to August 2009, and separation 
from her spouse damaged her family finances and are circumstances largely beyond 
her control; however, she did not establish that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She did not establish her income over the last three years or show what 
her spouse earned or how her spouse contributed to the family financial situation. She 
did not provide a family budget. She presented insufficient evidence about what she has 
done over the last three years to pay her SOR debts or her other debts. 
     
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to her SOR 
creditors: (1) proof of payments such as checking account statements, photocopies of 
checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the 
creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact 
with the creditor;6 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve 
these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress 
or resolution of her SOR debts. There is insufficient evidence that she was unable to 
make greater progress resolving her delinquent debts, or that her financial problems are 
being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, she failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is 43 years old, and she is seeking employment by a defense contractor involved with 
medical records.  From June 2010 to August 2011, and from June 2007 to August 2009, 
she was unemployed. Underemployment, unemployment, and separation from her 
spouse are circumstances beyond her control that contributed to her financial problems. 
                                            
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
There is no evidence of alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of her employment rules. 
She disclosed her financial problems on her October 24, 2013 SF 86. 
  
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Her SOR alleges 
17 delinquent collection or charged-off debts or judgments totaling $33,571. She is 
credited with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.j to 1.o, which reduces her 
delinquent SOR debt total to $30,554. She failed to provide sufficient documentation of 
progress to resolve her financial problems. She was well aware of her financial 
problems, as she listed them in her October 24, 2013 SF 86. Her failure to provide more 
corroborating documentation shows lack of financial responsibility and lack of judgment 
and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect sensitive information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to 
pay debts or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a public trust position to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a public trust position in the future. With more effort towards 
resolving her past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her 
obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her worthiness 
for a public trust position.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j to 1.q:   For Applicant      
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
    
 
 
