 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01649 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Ans.) on July 24, 2014, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on September 3, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 28, 2014, setting the 
hearing for December 2, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted into evidence without objections.1 Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through M, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and has worked in communications systems for a 
government contractor since 2009. He has a bachelor’s degree and is working on his 
master’s. He is single with no children. He served in the Marine Corps for five years and 
received an honorable discharge. He was injured while in the Marine Corps and 
receives a Veterans Affairs (VA) disability as a result. He held a security clearance while 
in the Marine Corps.2  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on a past-due account in the amount of 
$13,699 with a loan balance of $191,619 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and had three properties 
foreclosed between 2010 and 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b). The debt was listed on credit reports 
dated July 2010, January 2014, and May 2014. Applicant admitted the debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.a, but denied the SOR ¶ 1.b allegation. His admission is incorporated into 
these findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of fact.3  
 
 Between 2004 and 2006, Applicant and his then-girlfriend purchased three 
pieces of property. One was their principle residence (P1) and the other two were 
residential investment properties (P2 and P3). All three were located in different states. 
Both he and his girlfriend worked and had combined gross yearly incomes of 
approximately $130,000. All three properties were financed by adjustable rate, interest-
only mortgages. Sometime in 2006, the real estate market began a downward spiral. 
Applicant and his girlfriend quit their jobs so that they could focus on their investment 
properties. They had approximately $200,000 in savings that they could use to pay 
expenses. The investment properties encountered several problems. Because the real 
estate market declined, the values of their properties also declined. This decline in value 
was also coupled with higher interest rates due to an increase in the adjustable rate 
mortgages. They were also having difficulty keeping tenants in the two rental properties. 
The rentals incurred significant income losses for years 2009 through 2012. The 
relationship between Applicant had his girlfriend became very strained because of the 
financial problems they encountered. They used most of their savings by this time and 
they both sought to reenter the job market. Applicant was hired by his present employer 
after about 18 months of unemployment. It took his girlfriend about two years to find a 
job. He and his girlfriend broke up and they decided to dispose of their three properties.4 
                                                          
1 Applicant initially objected to GE 2, which was sustained. After further questioning by 
Government Counsel, GE was reoffered and admitted without objection (See Tr. at 14-15, 47-51). 
 
2 Tr. at 5, 27, 30; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 GE 4-6; Ans. 
 
4 Tr. at 28-31, 57; AE A, E, F; Ans. 
 
 
3 
 
 In 2009 Applicant was able to short-sell two properties. In November 2009, 
Applicant short sold the investment property, P2. The high balance of the loan was over 
$321,000. Applicant received a letter from the mortgage holder in March 2012 indicating 
that the loan was “paid in full through short sale as of November 2009.” He received an 
IRS Form 1099-C (cancellation of debt), which was claimed on his tax return.5 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant short sold his residence, P1. The high balance of 
the loan was over $432,000. Applicant received a letter from the mortgage holder in 
December 2009 approving the short sale. The property was sold for approximately 
$350,000. He received an IRS Form 1099-C (cancellation of debt), which was claimed 
on his tax return.6 
 
 The record evidence shows that neither P1 nor P2 were foreclosed as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. Both properties were disposed of through short sales.7 
 
 Applicant attempted to sell P3 through a short sale. However, the value of this 
property decreased by about 75 percent and the rental income was operating at a loss. 
The original mortgage amount, along with a second mortgage, was approximately 
$215,000. Two similar properties to P3 were valued at $70,000 and $84,000. The 
mortgage was sold to a new lender and it instituted foreclosure proceedings. The 
property was sold in September 2014 for approximately $158,929. The past-due loan 
that is listed in SOR ¶ 1.a is the loan on P3. The foreclosure took over two years to 
finalize. Applicant has not been made aware of any deficiency related to P3 for which he 
is responsible.8 
 
 Applicant is current on all of his existing financial obligations. He has no new 
investment properties and indicated that he learned a great deal from his bad 
investment experience. His current gross yearly income is about $84,000. He has about 
$15,000 to $20,000 in savings and he has a 401K account with about $30,000 to 
$35,000 in it. He is current on all federal and state taxes, his student loans, and car 
payments. He has about $3,600 net remainder each month after all expenses are paid.9   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31-33, 64; GE 4; AE A, D; Ans. 
 
6 Tr. at 31-33, 64; GE 4; AE B, C; Ans. 
 
7 Tr. at 34. 
 
8 Tr. at 31, 39-41, 44; GE 5; AE G-M; Ans. 
 
9 Tr. at 63-64; GE 2, 6; AE I. 
 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent real estate debts that resulted in short sales 
and a foreclosure sale. The evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions 
stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The short sales and foreclosure sale attributed to Applicant were recent. He has 
no further liability on the mortgages for P1 or P2, and he has not been made aware of 
any deficiency for P3. Since he is current on his student loans and has no other 
delinquent debts in other areas of his life, it is reasonable to conclude that these types 
of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Although Applicant’s decision to invest in real estate was a financial decision 
within his control where he must accept the inherent risks of investing, the national 
recession affecting real estate and inability to keep paying tenants in the rental 
 
6 
 
properties were conditions beyond his control. He acted responsibly by negotiating short 
sales on two of the properties and attempting to do so on the third property. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies.  
 
 There was no evidence concerning financial counseling. There are clear 
indications that the debts have been resolved. He supplied documentary evidence 
showing resolution of the debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s service to the country and his service-related disability. I 
found him to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his debt liability. 
He used the means available to resolve his delinquent real estate debts. He also 
learned from his mistakes and has established a sound financial record since his 
investment collapse. His current financial picture is strong. I found nothing to indicate a 
likelihood that Applicant would find himself in a similar future situation.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
