 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended. See also Directive, Section E3.1.1.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-03346
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant used illegal drugs for about 20 years, most recently in January 2013.
Given the scope of his drug use, his current period of abstinence is insufficient to
mitigate the associated security concerns. His request for a security clearance is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On May 8, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) could not determine
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to
classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included four documents (Items 1 - 4) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
On July 29, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline H (Drug
Involvement).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without2
a hearing. On October 9, 2014, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material
(FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 6, 2014,3
and was notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. He timely
submitted additional information, which has been included in the record without
objection. The record closed on December 6, 2014, and the case was assigned to me
on January 5, 2015.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana at least twice monthly
between April 1993 and January 2013 (SOR 1.a); that he used hallucinogenic
mushrooms between five and ten times between April 1993 and September 2008 (SOR
1.b); that he purchased marijuana on various occasions between April 1993 and May
2012 (SOR 1.c); and that he purchased hallucinogenic mushrooms on various
occasions between April 1993 and January 2008 (SOR 1.d). Applicant admitted each
allegation. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admission, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is 38 years old and works as a security engineer for a defense
contractor. He has a bachelor’s degree in information systems and a master’s degree in
business administration. Applicant was hired for his current position in March 2013.
From 2001 until 2013, he worked in information systems positions at a credit union and
a health services company. Both of those jobs involved access to sensitive information
or other fiduciary responsibility. This is Applicant’s first request for a security clearance.
(FORM, Item 2)
In his eQIP, Applicant disclosed the information alleged in the SOR. He started
using illegal drugs at age 17. He avers he stopped using drugs because he has grown
up. He also cites his happiness with his current job and its valuable support of U.S.
military efforts as reasons for ending his illegal drug involvement. In response to the
SOR, Applicant stated that he only purchased small amounts of drugs for personal use.
He further stated that he has no excuse for his drug use, but explained that he has
experienced personal tragedy and difficulties since about 1993. His parents separated
that year and his father died a year later. After his mother lost a seven-year battle with
cancer in 2003, Applicant became the legal guardian for his grandmother, who suffered
from dementia. He eventually had her involuntarily placed in a nursing facility before she
passed away in 2007. (FORM, Item 2)
 Directive, 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
3
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it6
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to8
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant is 38 years old, and he has used marijuana, at times as often as twice
monthly, for at least 20 years. He also used hallucinogenic mushrooms until he was 32
years old. At times between 1993 and 2012, he purchased small amounts of illegal
drugs for personal use. This information raises a security concern articulated at AG ¶
24, as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition); and 25(c) (illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia).
In response to the Government’s information, the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating
conditions are available:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
5
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant has not used illegal drugs in almost two years. However, his
involvement with illegal drugs spanned his entire adult life. Accordingly, this period of
abstinence is not sufficient to support a conclusion that he will not engage in such
conduct again. Applicant did not otherwise provide information that supports application
of any of the AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions. He has failed to mitigate the security
concerns about his involvement with illegal drugs. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Despite significant personal
adversities, Applicant has been professionally and academically productive. However,
he has also demonstrated that he is willing to disregard the law by purchasing and using
controlled substances throughout most of his life. His abstinence from drug use since
early 2013 does not yet show that his conduct will not recur, and that he is willing to
abide by laws and policies in this regard. As a result, doubts remain about his suitability
for access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest is the
central purpose of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved for the
Government.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
