 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01394 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Braden M. Perry, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a citizen and resident of United States. He has stronger connections 
to the United States than to Belarus. Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges six 
delinquent debts totaling $134,578. He did not make sufficient progress resolving his 
SOR debts. Foreign influence concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 25, 2012, and September 17, 2013, Applicant signed Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 
1, 8). On August 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to him, alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines B (foreign influence) and F (financial considerations). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
2) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as revised by the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 30, 2006, which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Based on information available to the Government, DOD adjudicators could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, and it recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On September 19, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On October 
21, 2014, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On October 27, 2014, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On December 11, 2014, DOHA issued a hearing notice, 
setting the hearing for December 15, 2014. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and place of the 
hearing. (Tr. 8-9) I received the transcript of the hearing on January 5, 2015.     
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 11 exhibits. (Tr. 15; GE 1-11) 
Applicant did not offer any exhibits. There were no objections, and I admitted all 
proffered exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 15-16; GE 1-11)  
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts in ten 
documents concerning Belarus. (Tr. 16; HE 4 with Attachments I-X) Applicant did not 
object to the AN request. (Tr. 16) I granted the AN request. (Tr. 16) 
 
Administrative or official notice is used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR 
Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) 
and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 
1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are 
either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 
1.f, 2.a, and 2.b. and he provided mitigating information. (HE 3) He denied the 
remaining SOR allegation. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old network specialist, who seeks a security clearance to 
facilitate his work with a DOD contractor. (Tr. 32) In 1984, he graduated from high 
school. (Tr. 6) In 2013, he was awarded a bachelor’s degree in information technology. 
(Tr. 33-34) Seven days before his hearing, Applicant and the woman, who was 
cohabiting with him since 2006, were married. (Tr. 32, 44) He does not have any 
                                            
1To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
children. (Tr. 33) He has worked for the same employer for 30 months. (Tr. 34) 
Applicant believed he needed a clearance for either secret or possibly sensitive 
information so that he could occupy a public trust position. (Tr. 35-38)    
  
Financial Considerations 
 
 In 2006, Applicant fractured his foot, resulting in $22,000 in medical bills, and he 
was unable to work for three months. (Tr. 44) Applicant had a profitable business that 
purchased and refurbished equipment that companies deemed obsolete, and then he 
would resell the equipment for a profit. (Tr. 22) In 2007, his business began to decline. 
(Tr. 22) Applicant sought advice from a bankruptcy attorney, who advised him not to file 
for bankruptcy and not to address his delinquent debts unless the creditors were 
harassing him or garnishing his pay. (Tr. 21, 25, 40) Applicant elected to comply with 
this advice, and he intends to continue to comply with this advice. (Tr. 21-22, 42) 
Although he pays some of his debts, he did not make any payments to the SOR 
creditors. (Tr. 26) His attorney said “in seven years it will all go away.” (Tr. 41-43)  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $134,578. A discussion of 
each SOR debt follows.  
 
The collections debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.a for $872 and 1.d for $885 originated with the 
same telecommunications carrier. Applicant admitted that he had an account with the 
telecommunications carrier. (Tr. 19, SOR response) About ten years ago, he decided he 
was being overcharged, or the quality of the service he received was poor. (Tr. 19, 24-
25, 39) He told the telecommunications carrier he would not pay the bill, and he has not. 
(Tr. 19-20, 24) Applicant is credited with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d as a 
duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 24, 51-52; SOR response) He did not make a 
written dispute of the debt. (Tr. 39)    
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the charged-off collections debt in SOR ¶ 1.b 
for $20,049. (SOR response) In 2007, Applicant used personal credit cards in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.f for $13,252, and the second mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.e for $82,500 to fund his 
business. (Tr. 20, 23, 25) In late 2007, his residence was foreclosed. (Tr. 46)  
 
Applicant denied any knowledge of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c for $17,020. (Tr. 24, 
47) The debt appeared on his June 9, 2012 credit report. (Tr. 47-51; GE 9 at 5) 
However, the debt did not appear on his October 3, 2013 and June 9, 2014 credit 
reports. (Tr. 67; GE 6, 7)    
 
Applicant believed the $82,500 debt in SOR ¶ 1.e resulted from his failure to pay 
the second mortgage on his residence. (Tr. 25) In December 2006, he opened the 
second mortgage account, and in 2007, he stopped making payments on it. (Tr. 53)  
 
After paying all expenses, Applicant has about $200 left at the end of each 
month. (Tr. 55-56) Applicant has not had financial counseling, and he does not have a 
budget. (Tr. 57) He was willing to complete financial counseling in the future. (Tr. 67) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
His spouse’s mortgage on the residence they occupy together, his non-SOR credit 
cards, and his student loans are either current or in deferred status. (Tr. 55-59)   
  
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States, and his spouse was born in Belarus. (Tr. 
27) She earned her master’s degree in Belarus, and then she came to the United States 
in 2002 or 2003. (Tr. 63-64) Her master’s degree was not recognized in the United 
States, and she returned to college and obtained her bachelor’s degree in accounting in 
the United States. (Tr. 63-65). Her parents and sister are citizens and residents of 
Belarus. (Tr. 27, 59) His spouse came to the United States when she was 18 or 19 
years old, and she became a U.S. citizen in 2010. (Tr. 27, 63) She communicates with 
her family in Belarus about every two weeks. (Tr. 80) 
 
 Applicant’s spouse travels to Belarus at least once a year, and usually Applicant 
accompanies her on her visits to Belarus. (Tr. 27, 59) Applicant and his spouse traveled 
to Belarus in 2014. (Tr. 59) Her parents do not have any political connections in 
Belarus. (Tr. 28) Her sister and father own businesses in Belarus. (Tr. 28, 61-62) Her 
parents have only been to the United States once. (Tr. 29) Applicant’s sister comes to 
the United States to visit Applicant’s wife about every other year. (Tr. 28) Around 2003, 
Applicant’s spouse received ownership of a condominium valued at $70,000 in Belarus 
from her mother. (Tr. 29, 62-63, 65, 80) In 2005, Applicant’s spouse gave a power of 
attorney to her mother, and her mother has control of the condominium. (Tr. 29-30)  
 
Connections to the United States 
 
Applicant was born in the United States, and he resides in the United States. (SF 
86) His father was born in the United States, and his mother was born in South Korea. 
(Tr. 68) His parents live in the United States. (Tr. 68) His father served in the Army for 
22 years, and he retired at the grade of chief warrant officer three. (Tr. 68-69) His two 
brothers, four nieces, two nephews, uncles, and cousins are U.S. citizens and live in the 
United States. (Tr. 69-70) His spouse owns their residence. (Tr. 33) She has been 
employed as a U.S. federal employee with access to financial information for seven 
years. (Tr. 71-72)  
 
Belarus 
 
Belarus declared its sovereignty in July 1990 and its independence from the 
Soviet Union in August 1991. The United States recognized Belarus as an independent 
state in December 1991. It is nominally a democratic republic, but it is actually an 
autocratic regime that has been ruled by President Alexander Lukashenko since 1994. 
President Lukashenko has systematically undermined Belarus’ democratic institutions 
and concentrated power in the executive branch of government by flawed referenda, 
manipulated elections, and arbitrary decrees. Belarusian authorities have severely 
restricted the constitutional rights of its citizens. There have been sweeping violations of 
human rights during elections, including disregard for freedom of assembly, association, 
and expression. Elections have been conducted in a climate of insecurity, fear, and 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
problematic vote counts. Belarusian officials may monitor foreigners and search their 
hotel rooms. Foreign nationals may face arrest, beatings, and detentions. Belarus 
exports significant quantities of defense materials, dual-use items, weapons, and 
weapons-related technology to countries of concern to the U.S., including state 
sponsors of terrorism. On January 3, 2012, President Obama signed into law the 
Belarus Democracy and Human Rights Act of 2011. This law calls for targeted 
sanctions against Belarusian officials and continuing assistance for democracy building 
activities. Belarus has attempted to expand relations to countries of concern, including 
Iran, North Korea, and Syria. Naturalized U.S. citizens from Belarus do not 
automatically lose Belarusian citizenship. See AN Materials on page 2, supra. 
 
Department Counsel's request to take administrative notice did not address 
economic or military espionage. No evidence was presented that Belarus actively 
collects economic or military intelligence.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR alleges six 
delinquent debts totaling $134,578. Applicant admitted his responsibility for all of the 
SOR debts, except for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. His admissions are corroborated by his 
credit reports. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to all of his SOR debts. 
Nevertheless, there is some mitigating financial information. Applicant’s delinquent debt 
resulted from the business downturn and an injury he sustained. These are 
circumstances beyond his control under AG ¶ 20(b). He maintained most of his credit 
cards and other debts in current status.   
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is not established. It does not appear in his 2013 and 
2014 credit reports. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is mitigated as a duplication of the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to any of his debts because he did not provide 
“documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
 Applicant admitted responsibility for four SOR debts totaling $116,673. He did not 
take reasonable and responsible actions to resolve these four debts. He is waiting for 
them to drop off of his credit report or become uncollectible due to the passage of time. 
He is not making any effort to pay anything to these four creditors. There are not clear 
indications the problem is being resolved and is under control. He did not create a 
budget, receive financial counseling, or establish that he was unable to make some 
payments to the four creditors. His efforts are insufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in Belarus. She earned her master’s degree in 
Belarus, and then she came to the United States in 2002 or 2003. Her parents and 
sister are citizens and residents of Belarus. His spouse came to the United States when 
she was 18 or 19 years old, and she became a U.S. citizen in 2010. She communicates 
with her family in Belarus about every two weeks. She travels to Belarus at least once a 
year, and usually Applicant accompanies her on her visits to Belarus. Applicant and his 
spouse traveled to Belarus in 2014. Her parents have only been to the United States 
once. Applicant’s sister comes to the United States to visit Applicant’s wife about every 
other year. Around 2003, Applicant’s spouse received ownership of a condominium 
valued at $70,000 in Belarus from her mother. In 2005, Applicant’s spouse gave a 
power of attorney to her mother, and her mother has control of the condominium.  
 
AG ¶ 7(d) applies because Applicant lives with his spouse, and she is a citizen 
and former resident of Belarus. His spouse is close to her family living in Belarus. There 
is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their 
immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to 
his spouse. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is [also] a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d).  
 
Applicant’s spouse’s communications with her family, who are citizens and 
residents of Belarus, establish a security concern because of his spouse’s relationships 
with her family living in Belarus. Applicant’s possession of close family ties with his 
spouse, and her ties to her parents and sibling living in Belarus, are not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or their spouse has a 
close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
  
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. His spouse’s relatives and their relationships with the Belarus Government do 
not have any of these attributes. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
his spouse’s family living in Belarus, or to himself or his spouse when they are visiting 
Belarus.   
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his spouse, or his 
spouse’s family living in Belarus, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services. Applicant’s relationship 
with his spouse and her relationships with family members living in Belarus create a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist his spouse’s family members in Belarus by 
providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of Applicant’s spouse’s contacts with her family living in Belarus. Department 
Counsel has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his spouse, and she has frequent contact with her parents and sibling, who are living in 
Belarus. Her loyalty and connections to her family living in Belarus are positive 
character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same connections 
negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to fully meet his 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his spouse, and 
her relationships with her relatives who are Belarus citizens] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has strong 
connections to the United States. He was born in the United States, and he has always 
resided in the United States. He is loyal to the United States, and he said he would 
conscientiously comply with the requirements for access to classified information.  His 
father was born in the United States. His parents live in the United States. His father 
served in the Army for 22 years. His two brothers, four nieces, two nephews, uncles, 
and cousins are U.S. citizens and live in the United States. His spouse owns their 
residence. She has been employed as a U.S. federal employee with access to financial 
information for seven years. She earned her bachelor’s degree in accounting in the 
United States. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his close relationships with his spouse and her 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
relationships with her family living in Belarus. There is no evidence, however, that 
terrorists, criminals, the Belarus Government, or those conducting espionage have 
approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, or her family to coerce Applicant for 
classified or sensitive information.3 As such, there is a low possibility that Applicant or 
his spouse or her family living in Belarus would be specifically selected as targets for 
improper coercion or exploitation. While the U.S. Government does not have any 
burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence were present, 
Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant or his spouse’s involvement with citizens and residents of Belarus. Applicant 
is not required to report his contacts with citizens or residents of Belarus. AG ¶ 8(f) 
applies to his spouse’s ownership interest in a condominium in Belarus, which is valued 
at about $70,000. Applicant and his spouse have more substantial investments in the 
United States.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s close connections to his spouse and her connections to her 
family living in Belarus are significant. Although Applicant has some connections to 
Belarus, they are insufficient to outweigh his connections to the United States. These 
U.S. connections mitigate foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.     
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
                                            
3There would be little reason for U.S. enemies or others seeking classified information to seek 
such information from an applicant before that applicant has access to such information or before they 
learn of such access. 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are less 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged committed any security violations. He was born in the United 
States and resided in the United States all his life. His employer is a DOD contractor. 
His spouse is a federal employee, who has been granted access to financial 
information. There is no evidence that terrorists or other foreign elements have 
specifically targeted Applicant since a U.S. Government contractor began employing 
him.   
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Belarus must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.4 Belarusian authorities have severely restricted 
the constitutional rights of its citizens and violated human rights especially during 
elections, including disregard for freedom of assembly, association, and expression. 
Elections have been conducted in a climate of insecurity, fear, and problematic vote 
counts. Belarusian officials may monitor foreigners and search their hotel rooms. 
Foreign nationals may face arrest, beatings, and detentions. Belarus exports weapons 
to countries of concern to the U.S., including state sponsors of terrorism. Belarus has 
attempted to expand relations to Iran, North Korea, and Syria. Naturalized U.S. citizens 
from Belarus do not automatically lose Belarusian citizenship. Despite these significant 
concerns about dangers in Belarus, foreign influence concerns are mitigated because of 
Applicant’s strong connections to the United States. He was born and raised in the 
United States, and he has numerous relatives who live in the United States.     
 
The economic downturn in 2006 to 2007 and Applicant’s injuries hurt Applicant’s 
finances. These are circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his financial 
problems. However, the financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is 
more substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He admitted 
responsibility for four SOR debts totaling $116,673. He did not take reasonable and 
responsible actions to resolve these four debts. He is waiting for them to drop off of his 
credit report or become uncollectible due to the passage of time. He is not making any 
effort to pay anything to these four creditors. There are not clear indications the problem 
is being resolved and is under control. He did not create a budget, receive financial 
counseling, or establish that he was unable to make some payments to the four 
creditors. His efforts are insufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.  His failure to make more progress resolving these four debts shows lack of 
financial responsibility and lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive information. See 
AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts or documented financial progress 
is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards resolving 
his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he 
may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his worthiness for a security 
clearance.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Although foreign influence concerns 
are mitigated, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden and financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
