KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline J; Guideline G; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence. Refusal to provide truthful answers to lawful questions by investigators will normally
result in denial of a clearance.  Adverse decision affirmed.    
CASE NO: 14-00606.a1
DATE: 01/28/2015
DATE: January 28, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00606
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 11, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct)  of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel requested
a hearing.  On September 30, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert Robinson Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines D, J, and
G are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
is an employee of a Defense contractor.  He has been employed by the same contractor since mid-
2013.  He has previously worked for Defense contractors and has performed his duties overseas in
support of U.S. military operations.  He served in the U.S. military from 2003 to 2007 during which
time he received non-judicial punishment for an offense involving alcohol.  He was discharged from
the military for misconduct, receiving a General Discharge under Honorable Conditions.  
Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) asked, among other things, whether in the
previous seven years Applicant had been arrested by any type of law enforcement official; had been
charged, convicted, or sentenced regarding a crime in any court; had ever been convicted of an
offense involving domestic violence; or had ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol
or drugs.  Applicant answered “no” to these questions.  Applicant’s answers were false, however,
in light of evidence of his interactions with law enforcement and the judicial system.   He was
arrested and charged with the following offenses: simple assault/drunk and disorderly, while in the
military (2006); assault, while in the military (2007); unlawful carrying of a weapon (2007); battery,
an offense involving domestic violence (2013); and public intoxication (2013).  These offenses were
substantiated by Applicant’s admissions to the SOR and by the evidence adduced at the hearing.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for dependability and honesty.  His colleagues state that
he has a high level of commitment to the job, is willing to accept additional responsibility, and
possesses the interpersonal skills necessary to handle conflict.
The Judge’s Analysis  
The Judge noted that, in his SCA, Applicant had certified his answers as correct, including
those at issue in this case.  Additionally, Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR the deliberate
nature of his false statements.  However, he testified at the hearing that he completed his SCA while
overseas and did not have all of the necessary information.  The Judge found this explanation to be
“simplistic.”  Decision at 15.  He concluded that Applicant had indeed deliberately falsified his SCA
and that none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions applied.  In the whole-person analysis, the
Judge noted Applicant’s favorable evidence, such as having moderated his alcohol consumption, his
good employment record, and his genuine remorse.  However, the Judge reiterated his analysis
concerning Applicant’s deliberate falsifications.  He also noted another falsification that was not
alleged.  The Judge stated that he mentioned this matter “as another example of a course of conduct
in which Applicant had omitted or concealed the truth.”  Id. at 16.  The Judge stated that, after
considering Applicant’s conduct, he had “substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance” Id.  
3
Discussion
Applicant cites to his good security record while performing duty in hostile situations.  This
was evidence that the Judge was required to consider, along with all the other evidence in the record.
The Judge made findings about Applicant’s performance of duty, explicitly acknowledging that he
had worked in trying situations.  However, the Judge’s overall adverse decision is supportable, in
light of Applicant’s admissions of having deliberately falsified his SCA.  Applicant has not rebutted
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 11-13626 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013).     
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  “The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action . . .: refusal to
provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions . . . in connection with a personnel
security or trustworthiness determination.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.   The decision is sustainable
on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly
consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
