 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 14-00624 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines F (financial 
consideration), H (drug involvement), G (alcohol consumption), and E (personal 
conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, H, G, and 
E. DOD took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD adjudicators could not find under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s middle name was misspelled in the SOR. 
 
2 
 
security clearance. On July 14, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have 
a decision based on the administrative record in lieu of a hearing. On October 7, 2014, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 8. A complete copy of the FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on November 5, 2014. He was given 30 days from its receipt to file objections 
or submit matters in refutation, mitigation, or extenuation. He timely submitted matters 
that were added to the record without objection as Item 9. The case was assigned to me 
on January 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old clerk who has been working for a federal contractor 
since August 2013. He graduated from high school in 2007. He attended college full-
time from 2007 to 2010 without earning degree. His Response to the FORM reflects that 
he resumed taking college courses in 2014. He has never been married. He has a son 
who is about two years old and lives with him. This is the first time that he has sought to 
obtain a security clearance.2  
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had eleven delinquent debts 
totaling $25,949 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k). Under Guideline H, the SOR asserted that Applicant 
used marijuana between May 2003 and May 2013 (SOR ¶ 2.a), that he purchased 
marijuana once or twice a month between August 2007 and May 2013 (SOR ¶ 2.b), and 
that he used cocaine two times between December 2008 and June 2011 (SOR ¶ 2.c). 
Under Guideline G, the SOR stated that Applicant was arrested and charged with 
driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs (DUI) in November 2013 (SOR ¶ 3.a). 
The Guideline H and G allegations were cross-alleged as the sole Guideline E 
allegation (SOR ¶ 4.a). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied seven of the 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f and 1.k), admitted the other four debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-
1.j), and admitted each of the Guideline H, G, and E allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.3   
 
 In an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated 
October 3, 2013, and during an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on 
December 3, 2013, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana from May 2003 to May 
2013. He noted that he initially used marijuana two or three times a month, but 
increased that usage to four or five times a month in about 2012. He further disclosed 
that he used cocaine on two occasions (December 2008 and June 2011) and 
purchased marijuana once or twice a month from August 2007 to May 2013.4  
 
 In the e-QIP, Applicant also stated that he had not smoked marijuana since May 
2013 and that he did not intend to use marijuana or any controlled substances in the 
                                                          
2 Item 4. 
3 Items 1 and 3. 
4 Items 4 and 8. 
 
3 
 
future. He indicated using marijuana was a waste of time, and he did not want to do 
anything to hinder his security clearance eligibility. He stated he had grown up and was 
focused on his family.5 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant again stated that he completely discontinued 
any use of illegal drugs and noted that he was willing to take a polygraph to 
demonstrate his commitment and honesty. He further stated that he is willing to take 
drug tests as frequently as required. On July 9, 2014, Applicant took a urinalysis test 
that reflected his urine was negative for marijuana, cocaine, amphetamine, opiate, or 
PCP metabolites. The overall result of that test was categorized as “negative.”6   
 
 In the OPM interview, Applicant stated that he was arrested for DUI about two 
weeks earlier on November 16, 2013. He stated that he had consumed about three 
beers before driving on that occasion. He was pulled over by a police officer after 
accidentally running a red light. He failed a field sobriety test and indicated he blew a 
.082% on a breathalyzer test. In his Answer to the SOR, he indicated that he had not 
consumed alcohol for several hours before the arrest. He provided court documents 
showing the charge was dismissed on January 30, 2014.7 
 
In the OPM interview, Applicant further acknowledged he consumed alcohol 
socially about twice per month and became intoxicated about once per year. He 
indicated that he would become intoxicated after consuming about eight or nine beers. 
Besides the DUI arrest discussed above, he has had no problems arising from his 
alcohol consumption.8   
 
 From May 2010 to February 2011, Applicant was employed as a sales 
representative by two employers. He voluntarily left his job in February 2011 and 
remained unemployed until May 2011. From May 2011 to August 2013, he was 
employed in three successive jobs before obtaining his current employment. He 
attributed his delinquent debts to a lack of organization.9    
  
 SOR ¶ 1.a – student loan past due in the amount of $1,578. In a credit report 
dated November 16, 2013, this account was listed as late over 120 days. Applicant 
presented a letter from the lender indicating that he paid the lender $7,364 on April 14, 
2014, to payoff this account.10 
 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
6 Item 4. 
7 Items 2 and 8. 
8 Item 8. 
9 Items 4 and 8. 
10 Items 2 (Attachment 1A) and 6.  
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account in the amount of $186. The original creditor on 
this account was a college. In a credit report dated November 16, 2013, the date of last 
activity on this account is listed as January 2010. Applicant presented a letter from the 
collection agency dated July 9, 2014, reflecting receipt of an agreed payment and 
indicating when the payment cleared the account would be considered paid. His credit 
report dated October 2, 2014, reflected that this account was paid.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account in the amount of $98. This was a medical debt 
that was apparently delinquent for two years. On December 3, 2013, Applicant paid this 
debt.12 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e – collection accounts in the amounts of $5,225 and $1,447, 
respectively. These were student loans that went into default in January 2012. Applicant 
provided a letter from the lender dated July 9, 2014, indicating that these student loans 
were “Paid in Full by Consolidation” on April 8, 2014. His credit report dated October 2, 
2014, reflected that these accounts were paid.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account in the amount of $481. This was a 
telecommunication service account. Applicant provided a letter from the collection 
agency dated June 27, 2014, reflecting this account was settled in full on November 12, 
2013.14 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g – 1.j – collection accounts in the amounts of $2,607, $4,964, $3,988, 
and $5,076, respectively. These were federal student loans. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted that he owed these student loans and indicated that they have been 
consolidated into one account. He set up a payment plan with the loan servicer that 
provided for automatic monthly payments of $50. He provided proof of those payments 
between October 2013 and June 2014. He also submitted a letter from the U.S. 
Department of Education dated December 11, 2014, indicating that he had five federal 
student loans totaling $17,679 and the loans were in a “repayment status.” Another 
letter from a government agency reflected that he rehabilitated his federal student loans 
and was eligible for all benefits associated with those loans before their default.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – collection account in the amount of $299. The original creditor on 
this account was a college. Applicant provided a letter from the collection agency 
reflecting he made a payment of $7,350 on April 14, 2014 and that the account had 
                                                          
11 Items 2 (Attachment 1B), 5, and 6. 
 
12 Items 2 (Attachment 1C), 5, and 6. 
 
13 Items 2 (Attachment 1D), 5, and 6. 
 
14 Items 2 (Attachment 1F) and 6. 
 
15 Items 2, 3, 6, and 9. 
 
 
5 
 
been closed and returned to the creditor. Final disposition of the debt remained with the 
creditor. This debt may be a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.16 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
I admit that in the past I have made some serious mistakes and my 
judgment could be called into question but since I have learned I was a 
father, I have realized the importance of being a role model for my son. I 
have been an outstanding employee, and have also been recommended 
to receive bonuses on numerous occasions.17 
 
Furthermore, Applicant stated that he is capable of meeting all of his financial 
obligations and his current financial situation was good. Other than his federal student 
loans that have been resolved, his most recent credit report reflected no delinquent 
debts. He indicated that, even if he is not granted a security clearance, he considers this 
process a win because he has completely turned his life around and will continue to 
conduct himself in appropriate ways.18    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
16 Items 2 (Attachment 1K) and 6. 
 
17 Items 2 and 8. 
 
18 Items 5, 8, and 9. 
 
6 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to pay for extended periods. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Starting in about December 2013, Applicant began taking steps to resolve all of 
the alleged delinquent debts. He paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f and 1.k. He 
rehabilitated his federal student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.g – 1.j. His most recent credit report 
reflects no new delinquent debts. He provided sufficient evidence to show that his 
financial problems are under control and are being resolved. His financial problems are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c) and 20(d) apply. Applicant attributed his delinquent 
debt to a lack of organization. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
 
8 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 potentially apply: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
From 2003 to 2013, Applicant purchased and used illegal drugs. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used illegal drugs when he was between the ages of 14 and 24. This 
was a period of youthful indiscretion. He voluntarily disclosed his illegal drug 
involvement in his e-QIP and OPM interview. His disclosures have been consistent. 
There is no reason to believe that he has not been truthful in his disclosures. Since the 
birth of his son more than a year and a half ago, he has not used illegal drugs. He 
indicated that he will not use illegal drugs in the future because he is focused on his 
family. The evidence supports a determination that Applicant has placed his illegal drug 
involvement behind him and that such conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 
26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 22. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 
9 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant was arrested for DUI in May 2013 when his blood alcohol content was 
.082%. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 One mitigation condition under AG ¶ 23 is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
When arrested, Applicant’s blood alcohol level was slightly above the legal limit. 
The charge was dismissed. No evidence was presented that he has been diagnosed or 
evaluated as having an alcohol problem. His reported alcohol consumption is not 
excessive or unusual. His 2013 arrest is an isolated incident that does not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
10 
 
Applicant admitted that he deliberately used and purchased illegal drugs for a 
number of years and was arrested for DUI in May 2013. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
For the reasons discussed under Guidelines H and G above, AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 
and 17(e) apply. The Guideline E security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F, H, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
11 
 
In making this favorable security clearance determination, all of Applicant’s 
questionable conduct has been considered as a whole. Applicant is a young man who 
admitted that he has made mistakes in the past. He has learned from his mistakes and 
has turned himself around. Since he became a father, he has focused on his family and 
acted responsibly by terminating his drug involvement and taking action to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He obtained a job, became a valued employee, and received 
bonuses. He provided sufficient evidence to show that he has matured in putting his 
irresponsible behavior behind him. He is now on the right track.   
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial consideration, drug involvement, alcohol 
consumption, and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 4, Guideline E  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 4.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
