1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00278
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern generated by his criminal
conduct. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as promulgated by the President on
September 1, 2006.
2
In an undated answer, Applicant admitted the allegations and requested a
decision on the record rather than a hearing. On September 27, 2014, Department
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). DOHA provided Applicant with a
copy of the FORM on October 6, 2014. Applicant did not submit a response, and on
December 4, 2014, I was assigned the case. On December 22, 2014, I re-opened the
record sua sponte to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide additional evidence.
(Judge Exhibit I, dated December 22, 2014) Applicant did not provide any additional
documentation.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 23-year-old single man with one child, a toddler. He has a high
school education and has been working for a defense contractor as a fitter at a shipyard
since 2012. (Item 4  at 10-11) 
In approximately August 2008, Applicant, then 17 years old, was arrested for
carrying a concealed weapon, a misdemeanor charge. (Item 4 at 24-26) In November
2008, he pleaded guilty in juvenile court, and was sentenced to one year of probation,
one month of house arrest, and 100 hours of community service. (Item 4 at 26)
In July 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault and battery. (Item
4 at 27) There is no additional information on file about the circumstances surrounding
this charge other than that it was domestic-related. (Item 4 at 27) Applicant pleaded
guilty and was placed on probation for two years. He was also ordered to attend an
anger management course. (Item 3 at 2) Applicant contends that he completed the
anger management course and that the court has ended his probation early for good
behavior. (Item 3 at 2) He provided no evidence supporting this contention.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
3
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Moreover, “by its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations”
(Id.).
Applicant was arrested twice between 2008 and 2013. He is currently on
probation. AG ¶¶  31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and 31(d)
“individual is currently on parole or probation,” apply.
Applicant’s 2013 conviction was recent. He offered no evidence of “job training,
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement” to
rebut the negative inference generated by the recency of his crime. (AG ¶ 32(d)) Under
these circumstances, Applicant has failed to meet his burden of proof, and I conclude
his criminal conduct remains a security concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant was a minor when he committed his first crime. It is therefore mitigated
partially by his immaturity. His criminal behavior recurred, however, when he was
arrested in 2013 for a domestic violence-related crime. Because he remains on
probation for his latest crime and failed to submit any evidence of rehabilitation, not
enough time has elapsed to conclude that he has mitigated the security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
4
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
