 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00856 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old consultant employed by a defense contractor. He has 
ten outstanding debts, totaling close to $170,000, some of which have been delinquent 
since 2008. His financial problems are partially attributed to unemployment and the 
housing-market downturn. Notwithstanding, he failed to establish financial responsibility 
in the handling of his debts. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 1, 2013. On 
June 9, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 12, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 9, 2014. The Defense 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on October 24, 
2014, scheduling a hearing for November 7, 2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3), which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented four exhibits (AE 1 
through 4). I left the record open to allow Applicant an additional period to submit 
documentary evidence to support his hearing allegations. AE 4 was submitted post-
hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 18, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations, except for 
SOR ¶ 1.f, which he denied. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, including 
his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old consultant employed by a defense contractor. He 
attended college and completed a bachelor’s degree in computer science and 
management-information systems in 1993. He is currently working on his master’s 
degree. He married his wife in June 1999, and they have two daughters, ages 13 and 
11.  
 
Applicant worked as a systems engineer for a large communications company 
from March 1995 to October 2003. He was unemployed from October 2003 until 
January 2004. He was hired by his current employer in January 2004. Applicant testified 
that he was granted access to classified information at the secret level from 2005 to 
2008. In 2008, his access was upgraded to a top-secret level.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his April 2013 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) that he 
had failed to timely file and pay his 2009, 2010, and 2011 income tax returns, and that 
the IRS placed an $8,000 lien against his home. He estimated his IRS debt around 
$30,000. He promised to resolve his problems with the IRS within a month. Applicant 
also stated that his financial problems started in January 2008. He explained that his 
wife lost her job in mid-2009, and the family lost her $95,000 annual income. To 
complicate his financial difficulties, his variable-rate mortgage went up and he had 
difficulties making his mortgage payments. In December 2010, he refinanced the home, 
and started paying his taxes through an escrow account. Applicant also disclosed that 
he had delinquent credit cards in collection totaling close to $75,000.  
 
The background investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the 
ten delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling close to $170,000. The SOR debts are 
established by the credit report submitted by the Government and by Applicant’s 
testimony.  
 
Applicant explained that when he married his wife in June 1999, she was working 
and making around $95,000 a year. Both were making good money and they did not 
have financial problems. They purchased a condominium in September 2001, for 
 
3 
 
 
$199,000. They lived in it until their children were born and they needed more space. 
Applicant was unemployed from October 2003 to January 2004. In 2004, Applicant and 
his wife purchased a detached home for over $500,000. The September 2014 credit 
report shows a current mortgage balance of $610,000. After they purchased the home, 
they rented the condominium and it provides them with some income. 
 
Applicant’s wife lost her job in September 2009, and she has been unemployed 
to present. She is currently trying to establish a swimming business with a friend. 
Applicant became the family’s sole provider in 1999, and his income was insufficient to 
pay for their debts and the family’s living expenses. Before he refinanced, his mortgage 
payment was $5,000 a month. After refinancing, his mortgage payment became $2,500. 
Applicant’s take-home pay was approximately $4,800 a month. Half of his monthly 
earnings go to pay the mortgage, and the other half pays for living expenses and some 
debts. Applicant testified that he is in the process of refinancing his home again. He 
presented no documentary evidence of his current efforts to refinance his home. 
 
Applicant used credit cards to pay the mortgage and family’s living expenses. He 
has not been making payments toward his delinquent credit cards, which include: SOR 
¶ 1.a for $25,952 (the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant in 2011); SOR ¶ 
1.c for $10,651 (the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant in 2009); SOR ¶ 1.d 
for $17,104; SOR ¶ 1.g for $59,731; and SOR ¶ 1.h for $51,448. He currently cannot 
afford to make any payments toward his credit card debt because he is paying the 
mortgage, a home-equity line of credit, and two loans he took against his retirement 
account.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that in the past he established 
payment plans with the creditors of the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, 
and 1.h, but he was unable to maintain the payments when his wife lost her job. He 
presented no documentary evidence to support his claims.  
 
The creditors are currently sending Applicant settlement offers for substantially 
less than what he owes. He has not been able to take advantage of the settlement 
offers because he does not have the financial means. He took two loans against his 
401(k) retirement account and he is not allowed more than two at a time. One loan was 
used to make home improvements when he was considering selling his home. The 
second loan was apparently used to pay his back taxes. Applicant plans to repay one of 
the retirement account loans first, and then request another loan and use the money to 
settle some of his debts. He believes this is the only way he will be able to resolve his 
debts. 
 
In his answer to the SOR and at his hearing, Applicant claimed that he paid the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.j. He was allowed additional time post-
hearing to submit documentary evidence to show the debts were paid. He failed to 
present documentary evidence to support his claims. In 2010, the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b 
obtained a judgment against Applicant. Apparently, some of the creditors obtained 
wage-garnishment-orders against Applicant. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial situation and accepts responsibility 
for his financial problems. He believes he is doing all that he can do to resolve his 
financial problems. Applicant sought the advice of a financial counselor and was 
advised to file for bankruptcy protection. He is considering his options. Applicant 
claimed that he also consulted with a debt-consolidation company seeking help to pay 
his debts, but decided against it because he could not afford the payments. He stated 
that he no longer uses credit cards for his financial expenses. Applicant’s performance 
appraisals show that he is a productive and valuable employee. He is considered to be 
trustworthy, knowledgeable, and dependable. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his April 2013 SCA that he and his family went on the 
following family vacations: Saint Martin in 2004, Dominican Republic in 2005, Cayman 
Islands in 2006, Mexico in 2007, Nicaragua in 2007, Aruba in 2008, Bermuda in 2009, 
and Mexico in 2010. They went on vacation to Florida in 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014. 
He explained that they drive when they go to Florida on vacation and stay with his wife’s 
family to save money. 
 
Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to show that he maintained 
contact with his creditors of the debts alleged in the SOR, voluntarily established 
payment plans, or disputed any of the SOR debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The evidence established the ten delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, which 
include three unpaid judgments, totaling close to $170,000. Financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 
19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(e): “consistently 
spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicative by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis” 
apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s financial problems are 
ongoing, and he owes a substantial amount of debt. He has been fully employed with a 
government contractor since January 2004, and has current net earnings of around 
$4,800 a month. Outside of a garnishment of wages to pay for a delinquent credit card 
(SOR ¶ 1.a), he presented no documentary evidence of any debt payments, contacts 
with creditors, debt disputes, or any other efforts to resolve his debts.  
 
 I considered that the debts became delinquent, in part, because of his 
unemployment in 2003, and his wife’s unemployment since mid-2009 to present. 
Applicant’s and his wife’s unemployment periods could be considered as circumstances 
beyond his control that contributed or aggravated his financial problems.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show financial 
responsibility with respect to any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He failed to present 
documentary evidence to show that he maintained contact with his creditors, 
established payment plans, disputed any of the SOR debts, or otherwise took action to 
resolve his delinquent debts. He has three unpaid judgments filed against him in 2009, 
2010, and 2011, and apparently his wages were garnished to pay one of the judgments. 
It seems that Applicant has continued to live beyond his financial means, he is 
financially overextended, and has not taken action to change his lifestyle to address his 
substantial debt. There are no clear indications that his financial problems are under 
control, or that Applicant has a viable plan to address his financial problems. In light of 
all available evidence, Applicant’s unresolved debts and lack of financial responsibility 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2004. He has 
ten outstanding debts that became delinquent after 2008. He failed to submit sufficient 
documentary evidence to establish financial responsibility in the handling of his financial 
obligations.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
