 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00767 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F, but mitigated 
those security concerns related to Guideline J. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response to the SOR, Applicant addressed the SOR allegations 
and admitted the 20 allegations set forth under Guideline F, but neglected to respond to 
the sole allegation noted under Guideline J. He also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 11, 2014. The 
 
 
 
 
2 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of video-
teleconference hearing on December 3, 2014, setting the hearing for December 30, 
2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
During the hearing, Applicant offered testimony and referenced several 
documents for post-hearing submission. Such documents were to be received by 
January 7, 2015. The Government offered two exhibits, which were accepted into the 
record as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-2. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was 
received on January 7, 2015. With no additional materials received by January 7, 2015, 
the record was closed. As of January 22, 2015, no such materials had been received.   
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old armed security officer who has worked in that capacity 
for the same defense contractor since July 2013. He assumed his present position 
directly after leaving a job as an unarmed security officer. Applicant served in the United 
States military from August 1999 through June 2000, when he was granted an 
honorable discharge under medical conditions. He earned a high school diploma and, in 
2010, briefly attended college. Since that time, Applicant married. He and his wife have 
a pre-school child and are expecting a baby.  
 
Applicant appeared at the video-teleconference hearing without first having 
submitted any relevant documentation. Provision was made for him to submit materials 
he referenced during the hearing within a reasonable time following the conclusion of 
the hearing. (Tr. 31) None were forthcoming. 
 
At issue in the case are 19 delinquent debts and an outstanding bench warrant 
for failing to appear or comply with a local court in a matter related to a 2007 tax code 
violation. At the onset of the hearing, Applicant noted that he had a letter from the city at 
issue indicating that the bench warrant should be dismissed, and evidence that he had 
made payments to the city for the related infraction. Such documentation, however, was 
never submitted to substantiate these claims, which are at issue here in SOR 
allegations ¶ 1.t and ¶ 2.a. 
 
Remaining at issue are the delinquent debts reflected in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-
1.s, which represent over $22,000 in debt. Applicant testified that he had, he believed 
he had, or could obtain documentary evidence showing that he had addressed the 
delinquent student loan debts noted at ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c ($7,457 and $3,916) through 
garnishment; he similarly argued that he had satisfied an unidentified city credit union 
account and the telecommunication debt noted at 1.e ($415).  
 
Applicant believes that most of the remaining delinquent debts at issue had been 
forwarded to a specific collection agency. (Tr. 16) That agency consolidated the debts it 
held and contacted him. (Tr. 28) He never sought out a debt consolidation plan himself. 
(Tr. 28) Applicant claimed he is paying this agency $75 a month to address an 
 
 
 
 
3 
undefined “lump of [his] bills.” (Tr. 16-17) Applicant conceded he was unable to identify 
which debts at issue were being addressed in this manner. (Tr. 17)  
 
The majority of allegations at issue are related to Applicant’s finances. Applicant 
is aware he “has terrible credit.” (Tr. 19) He has not pursued financial counseling. (Tr. 
27) He intends to continue paying his delinquent debts in the same manner he is now 
paying them, mostly through garnishment and a creditor-imposed debt consolidation 
plan. Although he concedes he did have some periods of unemployment, he attributes 
his financial situation and the debts at issue to his having been an irresponsible person 
while in his 20s. (Tr. 25) He currently lives “very tightly” under a “strict budget,” but one 
was not submitted for review. (Tr. 25-26) Applicant describes his family lifestyle as 
being neither poor, nor extravagant. His wife is a primary school teacher. They maintain 
separate bank accounts. While she has a savings account, Applicant does not. He 
does, however, have a retirement account through his workplace.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts, amounting to over $22,000, and an outstanding bench 
warrant related to a city tax issue. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Applicant specifically attributed the origin of his delinquent debts to his own 
irresponsibility. He presented no documentary evidence substantiating his claims to 
having made some progress on his delinquent debts. He has not pursued or received 
financial counseling, nor has he disputed any of the delinquent debts noted in the SOR. 
There is no evidence that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors 
or otherwise address his delinquent debts. Indeed, despite some testimony to the 
contrary, there is no evidence substantiating his claims with regard to his debts at all. 
Finally, insufficient evidence was provided to fully illustrate Applicant’s present fiscal 
situation. Consequently, I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern regarding criminal conduct is explained at AG ¶ 30. 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations. The city bench warrant for Applicant 
concerning his failure to appear or comply with regard to a 2007 tax issue raises 
security concerns, and triggers application of the following Guideline J disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.  
 
The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the 
criminal conduct concern. I have considered all the listed mitigating conditions and only 
the following warrant full discussion:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 31(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
Applicant claimed to have documentary evidence indicating that this bench 
warrant was to have been dismissed, but he failed to submit such evidence for 
consideration. It is noted that the bench warrant was issued in response to a tax code 
violation from 2007. That was several years ago and would have occurred during the 
period of time Applicant stated that he exhibited “irresponsible” behavior. Such factors 
open AG ¶ 31(a) and AG ¶ 31(d) for consideration. Few facts regarding the 2007 city 
tax code violation are known, however, and little more is known of Applicant’s life at the 
time. Since that time, however, Applicant attempted college, married, settled, became a 
father, maintained continuous employment in the same field for over two years, and now 
contrasts his present level of maturity to the “irresponsibility” he stated characterized his 
behavior in his 20s. In light of these considerations, and noting that this is the only 
infraction (criminal, civil, or administrative) cited, I find that AG ¶ 31(d) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant recently achieved the maturity that comes when one accepts the 
responsibility of a profession, marriage, and parentage. Although he still has financial 
issues, there is no evidence he is still acquiring new or delinquent debt. What, if 
anything, has been done to the delinquent debts cited in the April 2014 SOR, however, 
is unclear. Applicant’s testimony indicates that some strides were made toward 
addressing some of those accounts, but most of those strides were made by creditors, 
not Applicant. Moreover, lacking any documentary evidence regarding those accounts 
and their present condition, there is no way to assess their current financial status. 
Lacking such documentary evidence, financial considerations security concerns remain 
unmitigated.  
 
Clearer is the situation regarding the city tax court bench warrant from 2007. 
Much has happened in Applicant’s life since that era, mostly for the positive and 
 
 
 
 
7 
pointing to a more mature and responsible individual. Whether the warrant at issue is 
actually criminal is unclear. Regardless, it appears to have been an isolated infraction 
from many years ago. Sufficient facts exist to conclude that Applicant has been 
rehabilitated with regard to this allegation.  
 
This process does not require that an Applicant satisfy all of his debts. It does, 
however, demand that an Applicant articulate a workable plan for addressing one’s 
debts and evidence that such a plan has been successfully implemented. Based on the 
lack of documentary evidence presented here regarding the present status of his debts, 
I find that financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
