1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01708 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 9, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On July 7, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR. On September 13, 2014, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On September 29, 2014, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On October 16, 2014, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing for November 5, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
2 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer 
any exhibits. I held the record open until November 14, 2014, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit documents. Applicant timely submitted AE A through O, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On November 17, 2014, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a with an explanation, and denied SOR ¶ 1.b with an 
explanation. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old contract administrator, who has been working for a 
defense contractor since July 2012. He seeks a security clearance to enhance his 
position within his company. (GE 1; Tr. 19-20, 25-26, 30.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in May 2005. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in military history in July 2009. (GE 1; Tr. 20.) Applicant is unmarried 
and has no dependents. (GE 1, Tr. 20.) He was enrolled in the Naval Reserve Officer 
Training Corps (NROTC) during the four years he attended college until he was 
involuntarily disenrolled from the program in 2009, discussed infra. The primary reason 
for his disenrollment was failure to pass the physical readiness test. Applicant sought 
relief from his Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) debt by appealing to 
the Commander of the Naval Service Training Command and his local U.S. Senator’s 
office. His efforts were unsuccessful. (GE 1; Tr. 21-22; 42-49; AE A – AE M.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR contains two separate allegations – a charged-off debt to DFAS in the 
amount of $90,007, and a charged-off “starter loan” debt from a bank that specializes in 
serving the military community (bank) for $15,253. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b; Tr. 37.) 
 
As noted, Applicant admitted the $90,007 debt, which arose from his involuntary 
disenrollment from NROTC after his senior year in college. He denied the $15,253 
credit card debt stating that he settled this debt for a lesser amount and paid that 
amount in full, but did not provide documentation of same. (SOR answer; Tr. 24-25, 49-
50.) 
 
Applicant’s plan to resolve his DFAS debt is to apply at some future date to 
become an officer in the Navy Reserve and repay his DFAS debt through military 
service. Applicant has a college friend who recently became a Navy Officer Recruiter 
who “has found a way for me to get back in the Navy by becoming a reserve officer.” As 
of his hearing date, Applicant had not applied for a commission. If that plan fails, 
Applicant stated “I will work with the government in order to pay it via financial means.” 
3 
 
It is Applicant’s understanding that he could repay his obligation to DFAS through six 
years of Navy service. (SOR answer; Tr. 22-23.) Currently, DFAS is collecting 
Applicant’s $90,007 debt through involuntary recoupment from his federal income tax 
refunds. As of the hearing date, DFAS had recouped two of Applicant’s federal income 
tax return refunds and applied them to his debt. Applicant estimated the first year’s 
return was $800 and the second year’s return was $1,556. As of the hearing date, he 
had not contacted DFAS to set a payment plan. Nor did Applicant submit any post-
hearing documentation of having contacted DFAS. (Tr. 33-36, 45-46, 49-50, 56-57; AE 
O.) 
 
Applicant received $25,000 as a starter loan from the bank in his junior year and 
estimated that he had used “probably 30 to 40 percent” of that loan by graduation. He 
stated that this debt was paid off; however, the bank was “still holding $15,000 on my 
credit … due to $60 which was paid in fines because of overdrafts on the account.” 
Applicant stated he sent the bank a check, but the check was returned to him because 
they could not locate his account number. He settled the amount owed for $15,000 and 
claimed he paid this amount. As noted, Applicant did not provide documentation of 
payment nor did he submit documentation of payment post-hearing. (Tr. 37-42, 49-52.) 
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling. (Tr. 41.) His post-hearing budget 
reflects a gross monthly salary of $4,052, a net monthly salary of $2,835, and a net 
monthly remainder of $855. (AE N.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s NROTC Midshipman Evaluation Report and Counseling Records and 
counseling records are favorable apart from the problems he encountered primarily as a 
result of his physical readiness test during his senior year in college. (Tr. 26-32; AE H.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
4 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
5 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s two delinquent 
debts have been ongoing for several years. Despite having been put on notice of the 
Government’s concerns regarding his finances, the action he has taken to address 
those concerns is insufficient to address those concerns. Although he has good 
intentions and claims that he wants to repay his DFAS debt, his plan to join the Navy 
reserve at some future date and repay his debt by military service is too attenuated as a 
viable resolution. Additionally, Applicant has not contacted DFAS to negotiate a 
settlement or payment plan which would have served as a sign of good faith. 
 
Furthermore, with regard to the bank debt, Applicant claims to have settled this 
debt and that documentation of same was available and forthcoming. He did not submit 
the documentation as he represented and I am therefore unable to give him credit for 
resolving this debt. In short, Applicant provided insufficient evidence to mitigate his 
debts.1  
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
6 
 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Applicant’s employment as a Government contractor weighs in his favor. He is a 
law-abiding citizen and contributes to the national defense. Apart from his SOR debts, 
there is no evidence to suggest that he is not current on his day-to-day expenses. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. June 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).   
 
However, Applicant’s inability to address a significant debt to the U.S. 
Government or provide documentation of a debt that he claims is settled precludes a 
favorable decision. I am mindful of the circumstances that led to his financial difficulties. 
Applicant was unable to sufficiently address the security concerns raised as a result of 
an inability or unwillingness to resolve his significant debt.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
7 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
