                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 14-02655
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 22, 2015
______________
Decision 
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 24, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On July 22, 2014, the
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guidelines G and J for Applicant.  The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of
Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 2, 2014, and he requested an
administrative hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge
on October 21, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued on November 6, 2014, and the
hearing was scheduled by video tele-conference for November 13, 2014.  At the hearing
the Government presented two exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2,
which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented no exhibits at the
hearing.  He did testify on his own behalf.  The record remained opened until close of
2
business on November 27, 2014, to allow him to submit additional documentation.
Applicant did not submit any additional documentation.  The official transcript (Tr.) was
received on November 24, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 32 years old and divorced.  He has a high school diploma and
two years of Tech Mechanic trade school.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a
Airplane Mechanic and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engages in criminal conduct.
Applicant admitted to each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under both of
these guidelines.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Applicant began working for his current
employer in 2010, and was laid off about a year and a half later.  He was rehired in
January 2014.    
Applicant has a history of consuming alcohol, at times to excess and to the point
of intoxication, from at least 1998 to at least July 2012.  He began consuming alcohol at
the young age of fifteen.  He explained that he grew up in the country, and it was
customary for him to consume alcohol with his family members.  He normally drank
between one-to-seven beers with his brothers on the weekends.  (Tr. p. 24.)  Over a
period of seventeen years, Applicant consumed alcohol, off and on and at times to
excess.  There were times that he tried to stop drinking, but he eventually returned to
drinking as it helped him sleep.  Applicant states that although he has never been
formally diagnosed as alcohol dependent or as an alcoholic, he realizes that he has a
serious problem and needs help.  The only treatment he has received is the court
ordered DUI classes.       
In 1998 Applicant was first arrested at the age of 15 and charged with Driving
Under the Influence of Alcohol.  He explained that his mother let him drive her car to his
friend’s dairy which was on the dirt road.  Applicant did not have a license to drive yet.
He consumed about five beers and then decided to drive to a fast food restaurant.
Upon leaving the fast food restaurant, Applicant ran a stop light and was pulled over
and arrested.  He subsequently pleaded guilty and was convicted of DUI.  He was fined
and ordered to attend community service.  Following this arrest, Applicant stopped
drinking for about two years.
In February 2001 at the age of 18, Applicant was arrested for (Alcohol Related)
Disorderly Conduct.  At this point, he was consuming three-to-five beers about three
3
times a week.  Applicant stated that he does not remember the particulars of this
incident.  (See Government Exhibit 2.)
   
Two years later, in October 2003, on the Applicant’s 21  birthday he wasst
arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, (Blood Alcohol
Content over 0.08.)  Applicant got drunk after consuming about seven beers, and then
went to a fast food restaurant.  As he was driving back, he dropped the food behind his
seat.  He was trying to get them while he was driving when he ran into the back of a
parked semi-truck.  It was determined that Applicant was legally drunk.  Applicant was
arrested and subsequently convicted of the DUI.  He was fined, ordered to attend
counseling, and sentenced to five years of probation.  In May 2005, Applicant’s
probation was terminated as a result of the following arrest.     
In May 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving Under the
Influence of Alcohol; (2) Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (Blood Alcohol Content
over 0.08); and 3) Driving on a Suspended License.  Applicant explained that he drove
to his cousin’s house on a quad or  ATV, and then started drinking alcohol.  He forgot to
put his helmet on and wrecked the ATV on the main road.  A truck driver almost ran the
Applicant over.  Applicant was in a coma for two weeks, and was then sent to a
recovery hospital for two and a half months.  (Tr. P. 36.)  In May 2005, Applicant was
convicted of Count 2, fined, sentenced to 10 days in jail, and placed on five years
probation.  Following this incident, Applicant quit drinking alcohol for four or five years.
He also went to DUI classes, but for the most part, he quit drinking old turkey.  (Tr. p.
36.)
In about 2008 or 2009, Applicant started consuming alcohol again.  He began by
drinking about three or four beers, once a week.  As time passed his drinking increased.
In March 2012, Applicant was charged with (1) Driving Under the Influence of
Alcohol; and (2) Driving Under the influence of Alcohol (Blood Alcohol Content over
0.08).  He stated that his wife had left town to go see her mother.  Applicant decided he
wanted to get his ring back and to file for divorce because his wife was gone too often,
and he did not like it.  Before he left on the 150 mile drive, to get his courage up, he
consumed between three and five beers.  On his way back, Applicant was stopped,
arrested, and charged with DUI.  In July 2012, Applicant was convicted of Count 2 and
sentenced to 2 days in jail, and placed on three years of probation.  Following this
incident, Applicant quit drinking for about a year and a half, before he resumed drinking
again.  (Tr. p. 42.)  Applicant currently remains on probation for this DUI conviction until
July 2015.       
Applicant testified that he last consumed alcohol three nights before the hearing.
He consumed a 40 ounce beer, about two hours before going to sleep.  He explained
that it has become a ritual for him to drink at night to help him sleep.    
4
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22. (a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
22. (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent; and
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
21. (a)  a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
21. (d)  individual is currently on parole or probation.
Condition that could mitigate security concern:
None.
5
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient
period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an
acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
6
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in Alcohol Abuse (Guideline G).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline G of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant has a history of multiple alcohol-related
incidents, beginning at the age of 15, involving four DUI convictions, and one conviction
for Disorderly Conduct involving alcohol, that has continued to the present.  Applicant
has on various occasions tried to stop drinking, and at one point he was sober for four
years before he returned to alcohol.  Although he has never been formally diagnosed as
being alcohol dependent, he realizes that he has a serious problem.  He is unable to
sleep unless he drinks.  Given the extensive nature of his disease, Applicant’s drinking
is not under control and there is no guarantee that he will be able to maintain any long-
term sobriety.  Based upon his past record of relapse, there is a strong chance at this
point that he will return to his old habits.  At some point, hopefully, he will be able to
demonstrate the level of responsibility required to meet the eligibility requirements to
access to classified information.  At this time, however, he falls short of meeting these
requirements.
Under Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22.(a) alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 22.(c) habitual
or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent apply.
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.
Under Guideline J, Disqualifying Conditions 21.(a) a single serious crime or
multiple lesser offenses, and 21.(d) individual is currently on parole or probation apply.
7
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Although it appears that Applicant wants
to stop drinking, and has demonstrated that he can abstain from alcohol for a limited
period of time, he ultimately relapses and returns to excessive and extreme drinking.
He also indicates that he realizes that he needs help with his alcohol problem but he
has never really gone to get it.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the
conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person
assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  
Applicant has not demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy, and does not
meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct.)     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
     Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
8
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
