KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline G; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant was arrested twice for firing a weapon after consuming alcohol. He entered
a VA substance abuse program the day before the hearing.  He has not presented sufficient
evidence to establish a pattern of abstinence to overcome his alcohol problems.  His criminal
conduct did not happen under unusual circumstances and the last offense happened only three
years ago. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-08463.a1
DATE: 04/01/2019
DATE: April 1, 2019
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-08463
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Jane M. Reynolds, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
28, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that decision
—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline G (Alcohol
Consumption), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan.
2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 23, 2017, and
October 17, 2018, the SOR was amended.1 On December 17, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He retired honorably from the
military.  He has been married twice and has five children.  He is separated from his wife and resides
with his special-needs child.  He and his wife are trying to reconcile.  
The SOR alleges four financial concerns (Chapter 13 bankruptcy dismissed in 2016; Chapter
7 bankruptcy discharge granted in 2017; Federal tax debt of about $45,700 for 2009 and 2011
through 2015; and failure to file Federal tax returns on time for 2009 through 2015) and cross-
alleges two alcohol consumption and criminal conduct concerns (discharge of a firearm from a
moving vehicle after consuming alcohol in 2011 for which he was sentenced to 180 days
incarceration with 165 days suspended; and reckless handling of a firearm, swearing in public, and
public intoxication in 2015 for which he was sentenced to 12 months probation).  Applicant admitted
each SOR allegation.  
In 2016, Applicant filed his past-due tax returns, and the IRS determined he owed about
$35,000 in back taxes.  In April 2018, he agreed with the IRS to a payment plan of $425 a month. 
He is current with the IRS payment plan.  
Applicant consumed alcohol to deal with his problems and stress.  He sought substance abuse
counseling.  In 2015, he began consulting with a psychologist.  He last consumed alcohol the day
before his mother’s funeral in the fall of 2018.  The day before the hearing he began a Veteran’s
Affairs (VA) substance abuse rehabilitation program.  He recognizes that he needs alcohol treatment
and does not intend to consume alcohol in the future.  The psychologist believes Applicant has taken
the counseling to heart and is developing positive coping skills.  
While the receipt of a bankruptcy discharge does not amount to a good-faith resolution of
debts, Applicant’s bankruptcy proceedings in 2016 and 2017 do not create a security concern.  Even
though he has filed his delinquent tax returns and is now paying his past-due taxes, his tax
deficiencies do not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons
1 The SOR amendment on October 17, 2018, withdrew the earlier amendment.  
2
granted access to classified information.  He did not provide sufficient evidence to show his tax
problems were resolved, under control, or unlikely to recur.  He has not acted responsibly and
reliably.
    
Applicant was arrested twice for firing a weapon after consuming alcohol. He entered a VA
substance abuse program the day before the hearing.  He has not presented sufficient evidence to
establish a pattern of abstinence to overcome his alcohol problems.  His criminal conduct did not
happen under unusual circumstances and the last offense happened only three years ago.  
    
Discussion
Applicant’s arguments on appeal amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence.  For example, he argues that he filed his delinquent tax returns and is making a good-faith
effort to pay his taxes through a repayment plan.  He also notes that he is receiving alcohol
treatment, claims he is on his way to being rehabilitated, and maintains he should be given credit
for dealing with his problem.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the
Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh
the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable
evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an
ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00650 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016).
Applicant has not established that the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                   
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
