1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-02181 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct, personal conduct, and financial 
considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 18, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline J (criminal 
conduct) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
1 I considered this case under the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. I also considered it under 
the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using either set 
of AG. 
04/11/2019
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 31, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018. The 
case was closed due to loss of jurisdiction on January 23, 2018, as Applicant was 
separated by his sponsor employer, a DOD contractor, in August 2017. The case was 
reopened and assigned to me on October 22, 2018, when Applicant was re-sponsored 
by another DOD contractor.  
 
On November 2, 2018, the Government amended the SOR pursuant to ¶ E3.1.17 
of the Directive, to add allegations under Guideline F (financial considerations), 
numbered ¶¶ 3.a-3.m. Applicant responded to the amended SOR on November 9, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
(NOH) on November 13, 2018, scheduling the hearing for November 27, 2018. 
Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 3 through 13 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. I sustained Applicant’s objection to the admission of GE 2, consisting of 
unauthenticated reports of investigation for background interviews conducted on 
February 18 and March 24, 2016, and it was not admitted in evidence. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F, which I admitted in 
evidence without objection. At Applicant’s request, I kept the record open until January 
4, 2019, for additional evidence. By that date, Applicant submitted additional 
documentation, which I marked collectively as AE G and admitted in evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 6, 2018.2                                        
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d-1.f, 3.a-3.m, and he denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 2.a. He is 29 years old, single, and he has one child, a minor.3 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 2007. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2011 and a master’s degree in 2015. As of the date of the hearing, he was enrolling to 
earn a second master’s degree. He worked for previous DOD contractors from 
approximately 2015 to 2017. He received an offer of employment from a DOD 
contractor in September 2018, contingent on obtaining a security clearance. He has 
never held a clearance, and his interim clearance from November 2016 was suspended 
after the issuance of the SOR.4  
 
 In September 2012, Applicant was charged with driving with a suspended 
license; he denied that he was arrested (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a). He was pulled over by a 
police officer for driving with a suspended license, which stemmed from an unpaid 
traffic-related ticket. As instructed by the officer, he left his car parked and a friend 
                                                     
2 Tr. at 21-22, 27-31, 114-116. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 8, 15, 37, 61-62, 107-110; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 8-12, 44, 50, 72-78, 104-107; GE 1; AE B. 
 
3 
 
picked him up. He immediately called the state motor vehicle administration, paid the 
$100 ticket, and returned to retrieve his car the next day.5  
 
 In May 2014, Applicant was charged with negligent driving in a careless and 
imprudent manner, endangering property, life, and person, and driving under the 
influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 2.a). He was on a date with his child’s mother at a sushi 
restaurant. He drank sake for the first time. He did not feel intoxicated so he drove 
home. As he approached his home, the road that he lived on was flooded. He 
unknowingly drove his car on top of a submerged tree, then called the police for 
assistance. The responding officer asked him if he had been drinking, and he said “Yes” 
and disclosed that he had consumed a “couple of sak[e]s.” The officer looked into his 
eyes with a flashlight and administered a walk-and-turn sobriety test. The officer then 
placed him in the front seat of the officer’s car, without handcuffs, and drove him to the 
precinct. There, he was administered a breathalyzer test and tested under the legal 
limit. He received 18 months of probation before judgment, a $140 fine, and he was 
ordered to attend alcohol-education counseling. He completed probation, paid the fine, 
and attended alcohol counseling; he did not receive an alcohol-related diagnosis. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 2.a).6 
 
 In July 2015, Applicant was charged with second-degree assault (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
2.a). This was his first domestic-violence-related charge. He was living with his child’s 
mother and they got into a verbal argument. She called the police and reported that he 
hit her on her leg, which he denied. The case was placed on a stet docket. In August 
2015, the case was taken out of the stet docket when he was again charged with 
second-degree assault (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 2.a). He testified that he and his child’s mother got 
into another argument, after she hit him on his head with a remote. He denied hitting 
her. He stated that “She was coming at me in an aggressive way,” so he threw her 
purse at her, and the buckle of the purse scratched her forehead and caused her to 
bleed. When the police arrived, they immediately arrested him upon seeing the blood on 
her forehead. At trial, his child’s mother admitted that she lied about the July incident 
and he was consequently found not guilty of that charge. He received 24 months of 
probation before judgment for the August charge, and he was ordered to attend 
domestic-violence counseling. He completed counseling in 2016 and probation in 2017. 
He has since returned to the counseling program on invitation to share his experiences 
with other attendees.7 
 
 In June 2018, Applicant was charged with second-degree assault for the third 
time (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 2.a). He testified that he told his child’s mother that he no longer 
wanted her living with him. He then went to his weekly church group and returned to a 
vandalized home. He told her to take what she wanted but leave their son with him, 
since he was the sole breadwinner. He grabbed her keys and got into a tug-of-war with 
her over her cell phone, which he wanted to keep because he paid for it. When he let go 
                                                     
5 Tr. at 35-37; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-43, 53-56; GE 1, 3, 5-8. 
 
7 Tr. at 43-56, 64-65; GE 1, 3, 9, 10. 
 
4 
 
of the phone, he fell backwards onto the floor, and as he was standing up, she said “you 
just hit me, I’m calling the police.” He gathered his belongings and went to a friend’s 
house to spend the night. In the morning, he reported to the police station to try to 
provide his statement to any report that she might have filed the previous night. He was 
given the name and number of the reporting officer, because the officer was not at the 
station, and he left the officer a voicemail. He returned to the station when the officer did 
not return his call, and another officer was sent to his home later that day. That officer 
told him that there was no police report filed and he was not charged. He was thus 
surprised when he received a court summons reflecting that he had, in fact, been 
charged with second-degree assault. His child’s mother claimed in a police report that 
he hit her and placed her in a headlock. He hired an attorney and intends to fight the 
charge. The case was scheduled for a pre-trial hearing in December 2018.8 
 
 Applicant testified that the relationship between him and his child’s mother ended 
in December 2017. As her name is still on the lease, she has continued to reside in their 
home approximately two to three days out of the week. He unsuccessfully attempted to 
remove her name from the lease. He has known her since elementary school. They 
dated briefly in high school but fell out of touch when their families moved. They 
reconnected and began dating again in May 2014. He testified that he did not take the 
time to get to know her, and he learned throughout the course of their relationship that 
she has a criminal background, to include domestic-violence-related charges from 
previous relationships. He also learned that “the way that she communicates is through 
violence. And she’s clever. I have to give that to her because she calls the police.” He 
testified that he never initiated any violence, as he is not a violent person. He has not 
brought domestic-violence-related charges against her because she is his child’s 
mother and does not want her to get into trouble.9  
 
 In the future, Applicant intends to be more pragmatic in how he assesses and 
responds to situations involving his child’s mother, and to call the police if necessary. 
He no longer intends to protect her at his expense. He does not have any other 
criminal-related incidents. He testified that his employer was aware of his 2014 and 
2015 charges, but he had not yet reported his 2018 charge. While he was concerned 
about the impact on his employment that the outcome of his 2018 charge would have, 
he was not concerned about his employer finding out about it.10  
 
 The SOR also alleges the following delinquent accounts: a medical debt of $478 
(SOR ¶ 3.a); eight student loans totaling $118,656 (SOR ¶¶ 3.b-3.i); and four consumer 
accounts totaling $1,602 (SOR ¶¶ 3.j-3.m). The debts are established by a 2018 credit 
bureau report. Applicant also disclosed his debts in his 2015 security clearance 
application (SCA).11  
                                                     
8 Tr. at 56-63, 66-68, 72, 108-109; GE 11, 13. 
 
9 Tr. at 53-56, 60-62, 64-69, 78-83, 104-105, 107-109, 123-128; GE 1; AE G. 
 
10 Tr. at 53-56, 60-62, 64-69, 78-83, 104-105, 107-109, 123-128; GE 1; AE G. 
 
11 GE 1, 12; AE Q. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to being the primary provider from 
approximately 2014 to 2018 for his child, his child’s mother, and her 10-year-old child 
from a previous relationship. He was also involved in a no-fault car accident in which his 
car was totaled. He received $4,000 from the accident, but he had to apply it towards 
the expense of obtaining another car. He attributed his minor medical debt to his 
involuntary termination.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a is for a $478 medical debt. Applicant testified that he believed he had 
health insurance after his involuntary termination from a previous employer. He 
indicated that he did not receive a bill for his visit to an urgent care center for strep 
throat, and he was unaware of this debt until he received the SOR. He researched the 
debt and intended to resolve it with his tax refund.13  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 3.b through 3.i are for Applicant’s eight defaulted student loans from his 
bachelor’s degree, totaling approximately $118,656. He testified that he first learned 
that his loans were in default when he began working with the credit-repair company 
Lexington Law in May 2018 to resolve his delinquent accounts, as he did not receive 
any delinquent notices. He contacted the U.S. Department of Education after he 
received the amended SOR in November 2018, and he set up an income-based 
payment plan of $5 monthly for nine months to get his loans out of default. As of the 
date of the hearing, he paid a total of $10 towards that plan; he also made a $10 
payment in December 2018. He intended to continue to abide by the payment plan, and 
once his loans were out of default, he intended to make timely monthly payments 
towards his student loans.14 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 3.j and 3.k are for two credit cards in collection for a total of $827. 
Applicant testified that he cosigned the credit cards for his child’s mother in 
approximately 2015. He intended to resolve them with his tax refund.15 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.l is for a charged-off credit-card account for $238. Applicant testified that 
he was a victim of identity theft or hacking, so he closed his account with the creditor in 
2015. He testified that he is a claimant to a pending federal lawsuit against the creditor, 
and he believed the account would be resolved through the lawsuit. He testified that he 
disputed the debt through Lexington Law. Since he canceled his subscription with 
Lexington Law, he intended to dispute the debt directly with the credit bureaus.16 
 
                                                     
12 Tr. at 83-105, 108-113. 
 
13 Tr. at 83-85, 91-92; GE 12. 
 
14 Tr. at 92-99, 110-111; GE 12; AE D, E, F, G. 
 
15 Tr. at 102; GE 12. 
 
16 Tr. at 102-104; GE 12. 
 
6 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.m is for another charged-off credit-card account for $537. Applicant 
testified that this debt is for his credit card, which he forgot about. He intended to 
resolve it with his tax refund.17 
 
 As of the date of the hearing, Applicant worked as a financial analyst for his 
current employer. He was promoted in October 2018. His annual income was $61,200. 
He testified that he received financial counseling from three credit-repair companies, 
Credit Karma in 2016, and Credit Sesame and Lexington Law in 2018. He canceled his 
subscription to Lexington Law because he did not find them helpful; however, he was 
continuing to monitor his credit through Credit Sesame. He has also received budget 
training at work, and he has a budget. He is current on his rent of $1,225 monthly and 
his car payment of $360 monthly. He continues to be primarily responsible for his child’s 
expenses, as his child’s mother does not contribute. After expenses, his monthly net 
remainder is approximately $500. He has a savings account with a balance of $140. He 
has a retirement account with an unknown balance. He testified that “I’m just now 
starting to really take control of my finances,” whereas in the past five years, he focused 
on his immediate, day-to-day expenses.18 
 
 Applicant’s previous supervisor described Applicant as an “exceptional member 
of our team,” and stated that he had “full confidence in [Applicant’s] ability to maintain [a 
security clearance].” Applicant’s pastor of ten years described Applicant as a highly 
professional and trustworthy individual. A friend of ten years described Applicant to be 
an “upstanding, centered, and skilled gentleman.”19 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                     
17 Tr. at 104; GE 12.  
 
18 Tr. at 66-67, 69-72, 76-79, 83-92, 98-102; AE E, F. 
 
19 AE A, B, C. 
 
7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 31. The following is potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s 2012 charge for driving with a suspended license is a traffic-related 
offense. He was found not guilty of his July 2015 assault charge, after his child's mother 
admitted that she lied about the underlying incident. I find that AG ¶ 31(b) does not 
apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d and I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d in Applicant’s favor. 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s 2014 alcohol-related charges occurred after he admitted to an officer 
that he had consumed alcohol prior to driving his car over a tree submerged under 
water. He acknowledged that he was arrested and charged with assault in August 2015 
after the officers saw blood on his child’s mother’s forehead. He acknowledged that he 
threw her purse at her and the buckle of the purse scratched her forehead causing her 
to bleed. His 2018 assault charge is pending. AG ¶ 31(b) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 
1.e, and 1.f. 
The potentially relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are as follows:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant resolved his one-time alcohol-related charges in 2014 through 
probation before judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c and I 
find SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Though Applicant resolved the August 2015 assault charge through probation 
before judgment, his 2018 assault charge is pending. I am thus unable to find that such 
conduct is unlikely to recur, that he did not commit the offenses, that there is evidence 
of successful rehabilitation, or that so much time has elapsed and it does not cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a), 32(c), and 32(d) are 
not established as to SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
For the reasons set forth above, AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) do not apply to the 2012 
traffic-related offense or the July 2015 assault charge in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. For the 
reasons set forth above, AG ¶ 16(c) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f, and AG ¶ 
16(e)(1) also applies to SOR ¶ 1.f. While Applicant testified that he reported his 2014 
and 2015 charges to his employer, and he was not concerned about his employer 
finding out about his 2018 assault charge, he had not yet reported it to his employer. He 
was concerned about the impact that the outcome of his 2018 charge would have on his 
employment.   
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 
10 
 
 For the same reasons as set forth above in my Guideline J analysis, AG ¶¶ 17(c), 
17(d), and 17(e) are established as to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 
17(e), and 17(f) are not established as to SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, and thus Applicant has 
not established mitigation for SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
  
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
11 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that he believed SOR ¶ 3.l would be resolved through 
a pending federal lawsuit in which he is a claimant, as the debt was incurred because 
he was a victim of identity theft or hacking. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 3.l and I find 
SOR ¶ 3.l in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Conditions beyond Applicant’s control, as previously discussed, contributed to his 
financial problems. Thus, the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), he must provide evidence that he acted responsibly under his 
circumstances. He sought and received credit counseling, and he was continuing to 
monitor his credit as of the date of the hearing. However, while he learned that his 
student loans were in default in May 2018, he did not contact the U.S. Department of 
Education until after he received the amended SOR in November 2018. As of the date 
of the hearing, he had just started his nine-month rehabilitation plan and his student 
loans remained in default. He had not yet done anything to resolve his remaining debts, 
as he intended to do so with his tax refund. I find that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(d) are not established as to SOR ¶¶ 3.a through 3.k and 3.m. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
12 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude he has not mitigated the criminal conduct, personal 
conduct, and financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.l:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.m:     Against Applicant    
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
