 
  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 17-02909  
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
                                                   04/09/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Eligibility for security clearance access is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 24, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to apply for a security clearance required for a 
position with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make 
the affirmative findings necessary to grant a security clearance. DOD issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated September 7, 2017, detailing security concerns 
raised by financial considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Director 
of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs). The guidelines 
are applicable to all individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to 
 
  2 
 
classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AGs were made 
effective on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant provided her notarized answer on November 27, 2017, and requested 
a hearing. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on August 20, 2018, for a hearing on September 21 2018. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. The Government’s seven exhibits (GE) 1-7 and Applicant’s 10 
exhibits (AE) A-J were admitted without objection. Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits (AE 
K-AE M) were entered into evidence on October 25, 2018, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript on October 3, 2018. The record closed on October 25, 2018.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges a Chapter bankruptcy discharge in 2001, and a Chapter 13 
discharge in February 2010. The SOR also alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $67,472, of which $58,700 is student loan debt. Applicant admitted the 
bankruptcies under the financial considerations guideline. She admitted SOR 1.c 
through 1.i; she denied the medical accounts at SOR 1.j through 1n; and she admitted 
SOR 1.o through 1.w, with explanations. The delinquent debts include a rental 
judgment, a car insurance judgment, two department of education loans, two cable 
debts, two phone debts, five medical debts, a utility debt, four parking tickets, and a pest 
control debt.  
 
Applicant is 44 years old and divorced. She has two adult-aged daughters, 25 
and 24 years old. After high school, she received several computer certifications. She 
has worked for defense contractors from 2008 to 2018. Since March 2018, she has 
been employed by a contractor in the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) office of a 
Federal agency. In her job, she processes document requests for time sensitive delivery 
to the requestor. Applicant has had three period of unemployment: February to July 
2011; October to December 2011; and August to November 2012. Applicant believed 
her Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001 was caused periods of unemployment resulting in 
bills before 2001. She also recalled that she had a car repossessed before the 
bankruptcy. The Chapter 13 bankruptcy that she successfully discharged in February 
2010, was caused by working on contracts that expired and looking for new 
employment. (G1 at 12-18; Tr. 9-10, 45-46) 
 
 SOR 1.c – The Government documentation shows that the judgment was filed in 
April 2011, after Applicant’s February 2010 Chapter 13 bankruptcy discharge. In her 
November 2017 answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that she disputed the judgment. 
During her testimony, she indicated she spoke with the landlord and paid the debt in 
2010. Upon further questioning about the reason for the debt, she indicated that she 
had medical surgery and had to take short-term disability and did not get paid. She 
intended to check her paperwork to determine when she paid the judgment. (GE 4 at 5; 
Tr. 34, 48) The debt is unresolved.  
 
 
  3 
 
 SOR 1.d – Government documentation indicates that a judgment was filed 
against Applicant in 2015. In her answer, Applicant claimed that she paid the judgment 
and submitted AE B and AE G to establish that the judgment was paid. Even though the 
insurer’s name does not appear in either exhibit. In October 2017, the author of AE B 
instructed her to pay the $628 balance and the judgment and suspension and judgment 
would be removed. In February 2018, the state motor vehicle agency advised her that 
judgment and suspension was removed based on the agencies receipt of an order of 
satisfaction. (AE B, AE G; Tr. 51-53) The allegation is resolved for Applicant.  
 
 SOR 1.e, 1.f – the two allegations represent student loans for Applicant’s two 
daughters. Government documentation shows that the loans became delinquent in April 
2015 and were no longer in forbearance as on June and July 2018. Applicant cosigned 
for both loans, but did not realize that she was liable as cosigner if her daughters 
defaulted on the loans. Applicant’s post-hearing documentation reflects that the loans 
have been restored to forbearance, are in grace, or in repayment. (GE 2; AE C, AE D, 
AE K, AE L; Tr. 34-36, 53-6) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines, which 
are not inflexible rules of law, should be applied with common sense and the general 
factors of the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(d) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns of the guideline for financial considerations are set forth in 
AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
  4 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
AG ¶19 describes conditions that may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
  
AG ¶20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The SOR lists eight delinquent student loan debts and five medical debts. The 
total amount of debt is $51,311. The Government credit reports substantiate that the 
debts became delinquent between July 2010 and December 2016. The large amount of 
debt accumulated over a six-year period supports the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).  
 
 
  5 
 
While AE A shows that Applicant has paid a portion of his delinquent debt 
between 2013 and 2018, a substantial but unknown portion of his student loan debt 
remains unpaid. Applicant stated in his May 2017 PSI that he intended to contact the 
creditors and pay the debts. At the hearing, however, he stated that his work-related 
travel schedule was hindering his ability to address the delinquent debts. During the 
hearing, he restated his intention to contact the creditors and negotiate payment plans 
or resume payments. Applicant’s failure to show in his post-hearing submission (AE A) 
that he has a defined plan to repay any of his creditors continues to cast doubt on his 
judgment. AE ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 The record indicates that Applicant’s debts started to become delinquent in July 
2010, when he was working at one of his low-paying jobs. In 2013, Applicant began 
providing money and food to his father who had lost his job, resulting in Applicant falling 
behind in his financial obligations. In 2015, his father resumed working. The low paying 
jobs and his father’s two-year period of unemployment warrant some mitigation under 
the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
However, to receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), an applicant must produce 
evidence that shows he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been 
working for his current employer since February 2015. When his father returned to work 
in 2015, Applicant no longer had to support him. Assuming that the payment amounts 
posted and corresponding dates in AE A were in fact payments, Applicant made only 
four payments to the servicer in 2015, only six payments in 2016, only four  payments in 
2017, and only one payment in January 2018, although it is highly unlikely the payment 
was $32,176 as is posted in AE A. Applicant does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b) because his evidence fails to show consistent payment documentation on his 
student loans since 2013.  
 
 Applicant has never had financial counseling. Though AE A reflects that he has 
been in contact with the student loan servicer identified at SOR 1.a, there is no 
evidence to support a conclusion that his delinquent student loans and medical 
accounts are under control. With scant documentation of payments or payment plans, I 
am unable to conclude that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay his debts. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are not mitigated or excused by his work-related travel 
schedule or his uncorroborated claims of having the student loan debts consolidated. 
AG¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns related to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
  6 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
  
Under AG ¶ 16, the applicable disqualifying conditions are:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.  
 
 Concerning SOR 2.a and 2.b, Applicant denied in his October 2016 e-QIP that he 
had federal debt and that any of his debts had been turned over to a collection agency 
in the past seven (7) years. Those two negative answers were false. Applicant informed 
the OPM investigator in May 2017 that his omissions were inadvertent. In his February 
2018 answer to SOR 2.a and 2.b, he admitted both allegations. During the hearing, he 
explained that he provided a negative answer to SOR 2.a because he thought that SOR 
1.a and 1.g through 1.l student loan accounts were consolidated and current. He 
provided no evidence to support that claim. He defended his negative response to SOR 
2.b by claiming that his review of a December 2015 credit report showed no collection 
accounts. That claim is not credible as the Government credit reports show that 11 of 
the 13 accounts listed in the SOR had become delinquent by December 2015. 
Considering Applicant’s inconsistent explanations for his negative responses, and the 
absence of supporting documentation for either response, I conclude that Applicant 
deliberately falsified his October 2016 e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 
  7 
 
 Applicant did not make prompt, good-faith efforts to the falsification before being 
confronted with the information that the OPM investigator presented to him in May 2017. 
At the September 2018 hearing, Applicant advanced two claims for the October 2016 
omissions that are not credible. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Even though almost three 
years have passed since the falsifications, Applicant has provided insufficient evidence 
to establish that his conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. AG ¶17(d) 
does not apply because Applicant has not acknowledged that he falsified the 
Government security application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have examined the evidence under the guidelines for financial considerations 
and personal conduct in the context of the nine general factors of the whole-person 
concept listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old and single. In September 2008, he earned an 
associate’s degree in business and collision refinishing. After working several low-
paying jobs between 2006 and 2014, Applicant began working as a service technician 
for his current employer in February 2015. From 2013 to 2015, Applicant discovered he 
was having problems paying his bills because he was providing monetary assistance 
and food to his unemployed father. His father resumed working in 2015.  
 
In his October 2016 e-QIP, Applicant deliberately falsified the e-QIP by denying 
he had federal delinquent debt and that he had debts turned over to collection agencies 
in the last seven years. He stated in his May 2017 PSI that the omissions were 
inadvertent and he intended to contact the creditors and repay the debts. He provided 
some evidence of occasional payments to a student loan servicer. But, he provided no 
evidence of payments on the student loans since January 2018.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has noted under the financial considerations guideline 
that an applicant should demonstrate a “meaningful track record” of payments that 
shows overall debt reduction. Though Applicant is not required to demonstrate he has 
 
  8 
 
paid off all debts listed in the SOR, he should show that he has a plan to repay the 
delinquent debts and has taken consistent steps to implement the plan. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
   
While AE A shows sporadic payments on Applicant’s student loans between 
2013 and January 2018, the exhibit provides no information showing to which listed 
student loan debts the payments apply. The exhibit does not show whether any of the 
student loan debts have been returned to a current status or placed in forbearance or 
rehabilitation. The record contains no evidence that Applicant has taken any action to 
pay off the medical accounts, even though he has discretionary income of $400 to $500 
every month. Judging by the totality of the evidence, Applicant has not overcome the 
security concerns based on the guidelines for financial considerations and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
Paul J. Mason 
Administrative Judge 
