1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-03839 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Virginia Joehl, Esq. 
04/22/2019
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 8, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on June 13, 2018, and requested his case be 
decided on the record. He later withdrew this request and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 6, 2018. This hearing 
was originally scheduled for March 13, 2019. Applicant requested a continuance, which 
 
2 
 
 
was granted. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 8, 2019. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits 1 through 131. 
There were no objections and all exhibits were admitted into evidence. On April 9, 2018, 
I proposed to the parties that this case was appropriate for a summary disposition in 
Applicant’s favor. Department Counsel did not object. The transcript was received on April 
18, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He and his wife were 
separated in 2015 and went through an acrimonious divorce, which was completed in 
September 2017. In 2016, when he began the security clearance process, he learned 
that his wife had failed to file their federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2012-
2015. It had been agreed by them that during their marriage she would handle the family 
finances. His wife remained in the marital home, but refused to pay the mortgage or 
vacate it so it could be sold and resolve some financial issues. Applicant did not want the 
house to be foreclosed. He took legal action to stay the foreclosure, which was granted. 
His wife left the premises. Applicant fixed the house for sale and retained a buyer, but his 
wife refused to appear to close on the house. Applicant took legal action through an 
emergency motion to appoint a trustee to stand in her place so Applicant could close on 
the house. This forced his wife to appear and close on the house. Included in the closing 
were payoffs to different entities, including Applicant’s wife’s student loan, for which he 
was a co-signor. There had been a judgment against both Applicant and his wife for the 
loan. In accordance with Applicant’s divorce decree his wife is responsible for this debt 
and agreed to indemnify him. 
 
Regarding the federal tax returns. Applicant filed and paid all delinquent federal 
income taxes. When he learned of the delinquent federal tax returns, he also discovered 
that his Human Resource Department, where he was formerly employed, had withheld 
state payroll taxes for the incorrect state. Applicant lived in State A and worked in State 
B. His tax preparer had also mistakenly prepared his past state tax returns for State B. 
Applicant has filed his past-due state tax returns for State A and paid the delinquent taxes. 
He attempted to recoup the taxes he paid to State B, but was advised he could only 
recoup the taxes for the past three years; so he was only eligible to recoup it for one year. 
Applicant provided supporting documents to show all of his federal and state income tax 
returns are filed and the taxes paid. 
 
Applicant also provided documentation to show the past-due mortgage debt was 
resolved through the sale of the property, as were other debts. He provided 
documentation that all of the remaining debts are resolved. He credibly testified that one 
small debt was paid in 2016, and he requested the creditor provide him a receipt. He was 
waiting for the receipt to corroborate his statement. He credibly testified that some of the 
 
3 
 
 
smaller debts’ invoices were mailed to the marital home when he was not living there, 
and he was unaware of them.  
 
 Applicant provided a detailed budget to show he has a significant surplus after he 
pays all of his monthly expenses. He was recently awarded custody of his eight-year-old 
son. He does not have any outstanding debts. He does not have any credit cards. He 
currently maintains sole responsibility for his finances.  
 
I find that ¶¶ 19(c) and 19(f) were raised by the evidence. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) is 
applicable because it happened under unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. It is 
not unusual for one spouse to rely on the other to handle the finances. Applicant trusted 
his partner to file and pay their taxes and debts. I find that although these circumstances 
were not totally beyond Applicant’s control, when he learned of them, he acted 
responsibly to resolve all of his financial delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant sought assistance through his attorney and accountant to resolve all of 
his financial problems. He paid all of the delinquent debts and taxes. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), 
and 20(g) apply. Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
The concerns over Applicant’s finances do not create doubt about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence. I also gave due consideration 
to the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he met his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. This case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
