1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-----------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 17-03462 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David B. Hanley, Esq.   
______________ 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contested the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information based on security concerns stemming from his 
problematic federal and state tax history. After a hearing and in a Decision dated 
September 26, 2018, I found in favor of Applicant and granted him access to classified 
information (Decision). The Government appealed that Decision, and based upon the 
Appeal Board’s December 18, 2018 Decision and on remand, as described more fully 
below, I find against Applicant. 
Statement of the Case on Appeal 
The Statement of Reasons alleged that Applicant was indebted to the federal 
Government on two tax liens totaling $118,261 and one state tax lien in the amount of 
$5,585.1 Applicant admitted those allegations.2 In my Decision, I found that Applicant had 
mitigated the state tax lien under AG ¶ 20(g) and the federal tax lien under AG ¶ 20(b).3 
1 SOR ¶ 1. 
2 Answer ¶ 1. 
3 Appeal Board at 2-3 (App. Bd.) 
04/02/2019
2 
 
The Government appealed those findings. On appeal, the Board found that the ruling on 
the state tax lien was based on harmless error, but the Board did not disagree that the 
state tax lien had been mitigated under AG ¶ 20(g).4  
 
On appeal, the Board ruled that the record evidence contradicted my Decision’s 
finding that Applicant had complied with the IRS’s guidance to “keep up with current 
taxes.” The Board observed that Applicant had “delinquent business taxes for each 
quarter of 2016” and was “twice delinquent” on those taxes in 2017.5 Finally, the Board 
found that it was error not to grant the Government’s request under Federal Rule of 
Evidence 1006 for access to the data or documents underlying AE H, which was an Excel 
spreadsheet showing certain payments made by Applicant under an IRS installment 
agreement.6 The Board remanded the case to the Judge (1) to correct the identified 
errors, (2) to reopen the record to allow the parties to present additional evidence and 
arguments about Applicant’s payment of back taxes, and (3) to issue a new decision in 
accordance with the Directive.7 
 
Statement of the Case on Remand  
 
          In light of the Appeal Board’s Decision, on remand, first, I reopened the record on 
January 11, 2019. Second, I ordered Applicant to produce the documents underlying AE 
H by January 25, 2019. Third, I allowed the parties to submit additional evidence on 
Applicant’s payments (or lack thereof) of federal taxes. Finally, I directed the parties to 
submit written closing arguments: the Government by February 12, 2019, and Applicant 
by February 22, 2019.  
 
         Applicant timely submitted documents which I marked as AE I and AE J. AE I is a 
series of cancelled checks showing the total of $72,000 paid in 2014 under an installment 
agreement with the IRS ($6,000 monthly). Those are the documents underlying AE H. AE 
J is a series of bank statements showing Applicant’s monthly electronic payments of 
federal payroll taxes. Those exhibits were admitted without objection.8 
 
        The parties timely submitted written closing arguments.9  
                                                          
 
4 App. Bd. at 4.  
 
5 App Bd. at 4.  
 
6 App. Bd. at 5-6.  
 
7 App. Bd. at 6-7.   
 
8 I also marked as Hearing Exhibit 1 (HE 1) a series of emails among the parties and me from January 9, 
2019, through March 25, 2019. The Government did not submit any additional documents. Deputy Chief 
Department Counsel noted, however, that the Government has not asserted that Applicant failed to pay 
any payroll taxes. HE 1 email from Deputy Chief Department Counsel dated February 19, 2019. 
  
9 The closing arguments of both parties were excellent pieces of written advocacy.    
  
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
           I incorporate herein by reference the findings of fact in my Decision and the  
summary of those findings by the Appeal Board.10 The two exhibits submitted on remand 
by Applicant do not change the original findings of fact.  
 
      Discussion 
 
           The Government’s principal factual basis for its arguments is that Applicant 
remains delinquent on federal quarterly business taxes for the following time periods: 
December 2010, March and June 2011, September 2011, September 2015, March 2016, 
June 2016, September 2016, December 2016, March 2017, and June 2017. He remains 
delinquent in unemployment taxes for December 2013 and December 2016. Applicant 
remains delinquent on federal corporate taxes for December 2016. In addition, the 
Government observes that Applicant’s total outstanding federal tax debt at the time of his 
installment agreement was $109,230.11 
 
 With that factual predicate, the Government argues in essence that Applicant’s 
continued federal tax delinquencies, notwithstanding an installment agreement, do not 
establish that he has reformed and rehabilitated his business practices sufficiently to 
prevent further tax delinquencies. The Government also points out that Applicant has 
consistently underpaid his federal taxes from 2010 through 2017. The Government also 
contends that there is not “a cogent explanation showing a nexus” between his wife’s 
illness and the late customer invoice payments and Applicant’s tax delinquencies. The 
Government argues, therefore, that AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant argues to the contrary that he has negotiated diligently with the IRS for 
several years (since 2013) to arrange installment payment agreements. It is also noted 
that Applicant has, in fact, taken internal steps to prevent such delinquencies in the future. 
His wife, who originally was to handle administrative tasks, has stepped away from day-
to-day administration. Applicant will now take over those duties. Applicant has also hired 
an administrative assistant to aid in the handling of those duties. 
 
 I have carefully weighed the parties’ closing arguments. I disagree with the 
Government’s contention that Applicant has not made meaningful adjustments to his 
business practices. To begin with, the record showed that Applicant only belatedly 
became aware that his wife had been unable to keep up with administrative duties due to 
her illness. When he learned of that issue, Applicant immediately took on the 
administrative duties himself. He also began negotiating with state and federal tax 
authorities, reaching installment agreements with both of them. He put his clients on strict 
                                                          
10 Decision at 2-5; App. Bd. at 2. 
  
11 Government Brief (which is not paginated) notes 23-28 citing AE D at 9 and AE E. 
4 
 
payment schedules. And his wife stepped away from daily administrative duties, in favor 
of a newly hired administrative assistant.12 
 
 I also disagree with the Government that there is an insufficient nexus between 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies and his wife’s illness. Having observed Applicant’s 
testimony, it is clear that his wife’s illness was only belatedly discovered by him and was 
serious enough for his wife ultimately to require surgery. He thus lost his 60% partner’s 
participation in the business of a two-member LLC. This was a condition largely beyond 
Applicant’s control. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 The open question is whether Applicant’s modifications to his business tax 
practices have been responsible. The Government’s strongest evidence on this point is 
that Applicant has consistently underpaid his federal taxes from 2010 through 2017, 
notwithstanding installment agreements. In the vernacular, the Government’s position is 
that what Applicant did was “too little, too late.” Or as the old saying goes, “the proof is in 
the pudding,” and Applicant’s persistent tax delinquencies are evidence that Applicant’s 
business reforms have not proven to be sufficient. In short, the Government contends 
that Applicant has not acted responsibly under AG ¶ 20(b). I agree. The Appeal Board 
found error in my conclusion that Applicant had complied with the IRS guidance that he 
“keep up with current taxes.”13 Neither of Applicant’s two exhibits submitted on remand 
give me a factual basis to find that Applicant has kept current with his taxes.14   
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      Against Applicant 
 
      Subparagraph 1.a:         For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.b-c:             Against Applicant 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
12 The Government contends that this administrative assistant “is not a financial or tax professional.” I find 
that unpersuasive. I imagine that many Applicants file their own tax returns, without any formal tax training 
or experience.  
 
13 App. Bd. at 4. 
 
14 As I did in my original Decision, I considered the whole-person concept in reaching my conclusions on 
remand. AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9). 
5 
 
 
 
