 1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-04063 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s documentation is insufficient to show that he has returned his 
delinquent student loans to a current status. He provided no evidence of steps taken to 
resolve the delinquent medical accounts. Overall, the guidelines for financial 
consideration and personal conduct are unmitigated. Eligibility for security clearance 
access is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 17, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to apply for a security clearance required for a 
position with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make 
the affirmative findings necessary to grant a security clearance. DOD issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated December 21, 2017, detailing security concerns 
raised by financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
04/02/2019
 
  2 
 
amended (Directive); and the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs). The guidelines are applicable to all individuals who require 
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a 
sensitive position. The AGs were made effective on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant provided his notarized answer on February 21, 2018, and requested a 
hearing. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on September 11, 2018, for a hearing on September 27, 2018. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. The Government’s four exhibits (GE) 1-43 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s post-hearing submission (AE) A was entered into evidence on 
October 16, 2018, without objection. Based on Department Counsel’s questions 
(transmitted in an email forwarding AE A to me) related to the origin of two large 
payments and what the large payments represent, I emailed Applicant and Department 
Counsel on October 17, 2018, indicating that Applicant would be granted additional time 
until November 2, 2018, to supply explanations and/or supporting documentation. 
DOHA received no additional documentation from Applicant. DOHA received the 
transcript on October 5, 2018. The record closed on November 2, 2018.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The first paragraph of the SOR alleges thirteen delinquent debts under the 
financial considerations guideline. Those debts, which total $51,311, include eight 
student loan accounts and five medical accounts. The second paragraph lists two 
allegations under the personal conduct guideline. Applicant admitted all allegations. 
(Answer to SOR) 
 
Applicant is 31 years old and single. He has been employed as a service 
technician for a defense contractor since February 2015. His job requires him to travel 
to job sites around the world, and erect and start compressors or provide general 
maintenance to existing units. His employment between 2006 and 2014 was in low-
paying jobs as a car salesman, a detailer, jobs in fast food restaurants, and a hotel 
bellman. In September 2008, he earned an associate’s degree in business and collision 
refinishing. Applicant has never held a security clearance. (GE 1 at 5-22, 36-37; Tr. 10) 
 
 Applicant explained in his May 2017 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
interview (PSI) that the reasons for his financial problems were a lack of funds caused 
by low paying jobs, and taking care of his father. As a result, he had trouble paying his 
financial obligations. He believed the student loans at SOR 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l 
were consolidated.1 He surmised that the student loan at SOR 1.m, that had become 
delinquent in November 2010, had been consolidated and he was trying to settle the 
debt. Applicant believed that the medical accounts at SOR 1.b through 1.f had been 
                                            
1 These accounts became delinquent in July 2010. (AE 2 at 6) 
 
  3 
 
settled. He informed the OPM investigator that he would contact the creditors and pay 
the accounts. (AE 2 at 15)  
 
 During the hearing, Applicant testified that all the student loan accounts listed in 
the SOR were opened to finance Applicant’s associate’s degree which he received in 
September 2008. He conceded that the SOR 1.a student loan account was still in 
default and that he has to make arrangements to begin paying the account. He had no 
documents showing correspondence with the student loan servicer. His only contact 
occurred by telephone. Regarding the student loan accounts at SOR 1.g through 1.l, he 
indicated that the servicer for the accounts informed him that he was actually 
responsible for 12 loan accounts. Applicant admitted that the student loan account at 
SOR 1.m was in default and he intended to contact the servicer to bring the account 
current. The only documentary evidence that Applicant furnished is AE A, but it is 
impossible to determine from the exhibit what action Applicant took to return any of the 
student loan accounts to a current status. (GE 2 at 5-6, 15; AE A; Tr. 23, 25-26) 
 
 According to Applicant, the five medical accounts at SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 
1.f, resulted from a single trip to a hospital emergency room. He was prescribed 
medication to alleviate the pain from a toothache until he could see a dentist. Applicant 
could provide no explanation for why he received five bills for one emergency room visit. 
He was not certain whether he had medical insurance to cover the emergency room 
treatment. The Government credit bureau reports reflect that the medical bills were 
incurred on five different occasions between May 2011 and July 2016. (GE 2 at 15-17; 
GE 4 at 2; Tr. 24-25)  
 
 Applicant testified at the hearing that he did not contact and negotiate 
settlements with the listed creditors as he stated to the OPM investigator in May 2017 
because of his work-related travel. He is out of the office three to four days a week. 
Though his employer’s policy is to have employees in the office 50 percent of the time 
and on travel 50 percent of the time, sometimes he is out of the office up 80 percent of 
the time. (Tr. 26-27) 
 
 Between 2013 and 2015, Applicant was taking care of his father who was 
unemployed. Applicant provided money and food to his father during this period. This 
was one of the reasons his debts became delinquent. His father resumed working in 
2015. (GE 3 6-7; Tr. 28) 
 
 Another reason for Applicant’s delinquent debts was his low-paying employment 
before he began working at his present employer in February 2015. His monthly take 
home pay from his much better paying current job is between $2,100 and $2,200 a 
month. After he pays his monthly expenses, he has about $400 to $500 a month of 
discretionary income left over. He has approximately $1,000 in his savings account. He 
has never had financial counseling. (Tr. 29-30) 
 
 
  4 
 
 In his May 2017 PSI, Applicant indicated that his omission of information from his 
e-QIP (SOR 2.a, 2.b) was inadvertent. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted falsifying 
the Section 26A question when he answered “no” to being delinquent on any federal 
debt, deliberately failing to disclose federal student loans at SOR 1.a and 1.g through 1.l 
(SOR 2.a). In his answer to the SOR, he admitted deliberately falsifying Section 26A 
question when he answered “no” to having bills turned over to a collection agency in the 
past seven (7) years (SOR 2.b). (GE 3 at 6; answer to SOR) 
 
 During the hearing, Applicant explained the reason for his “no” answer to SOR 
2.a was not inadvertence as he stated in his May 2017 PSI. Rather, he testified, “from 
what I [was] paying during that time (October 2016), I thought that everything was 
consolidated, but it was not. So, I answered no because I believed I [was] current at that 
current time.” Applicant had no documents to verify he was making payments in 
October 2016 or that his student loans were current. Applicant’s testimonial explanation 
for his “no” answer to SOR 2.b was based on a credit report he claimed he viewed in 
December 2015 showing that he had no collection accounts. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 30-
31) 
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing exhibit, AE A, two pages in length, is entitled “payment 
history” generated by the student loan servicer identified in SOR 1.a. The exhibit 
contains six columns: the first column identifies the date payments were made; the 
second column of figures is labeled payment amount; the third column identifies the 
portion of the payment amount that was applied to the principal debt; the fourth column 
identifies the portion of the payment amount that was applied to interest; the fifth column 
identifies the payment amount that applied to fees (a notation on the second page 
indicates the United States Government does not assess late or returned payment 
fees); and the sixth column identifies the payment type. The sixth column (payment 
type) indicates that from January 2013 to June 2013, Applicant apparently paid the 
student loan servicer by check on seven occasions. The payment type for the remaining 
payments is labeled “other.” Applicant supplied no explanation for how to define the 
“other” payment type. 
 
 AE A shows that all payments are below $175 except for a payment of $12,689 
in September 2015, and a payment a $32,176, the only payment for 2018. Where do 
these large payments come from and are they payments or loan consolidations? Which 
student loan account or accounts in AE A are listed in the SOR? AE A does not provide 
answers to these two questions. AE A does not indicate whether any of the student loan 
accounts have been placed in forbearance or rehabilitation. Applicant testified that his 
“no” answer to SOR 2.a was based on what he was paying at the time of the October 
2016 e-QIP. A review of the payment dates in 2016 show that he made five $160 
payments from February through June 2016, but no payments to the servicer from July 
2016 through October 2016. In November 2016, he made a payment of $160, but no 
payment in December 2016. He made only four monthly payments in 2017, two $160 
monthly payments and one $320 payment (where he doubled the monthly payment). 
Due to the foregoing unanswered questions about the exhibit and the sporadic record of 
 
  5 
 
payments shown within the exhibit, I can only assign limited weight to AE A. In addition, 
Applicant provided no documentary evidence indicating that he has taken action to 
resolve the listed medical accounts. (Tr. 30-31; AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines, which 
are not inflexible rules of law, should be applied with common sense and the general 
factors of the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(d) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns of the guideline for financial considerations are set forth in 
AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
  6 
 
AG ¶19 describes conditions that may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
  
AG ¶20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The SOR lists eight delinquent student loan debts and five medical debts. The 
total amount of debt is $51,311. The Government credit reports substantiate that the 
debts became delinquent between July 2010 and December 2016. The large amount of 
debt accumulated over a six-year period supports the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).  
 
While AE A shows that Applicant has paid a portion of his delinquent debt 
between 2013 and 2018, a substantial but unknown portion of his student loan debt 
remains unpaid. Applicant stated in his May 2017 PSI that he intended to contact the 
creditors and pay the debts. At the hearing, however, he stated that his work-related 
travel schedule was hindering his ability to address the delinquent debts. During the 
hearing, he restated his intention to contact the creditors and negotiate payment plans 
or resume payments. Applicant’s failure to show in his post-hearing submission (AE A) 
that he has a defined plan to repay any of his creditors continues to cast doubt on his 
judgment. AE ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 The record indicates that Applicant’s debts started to become delinquent in July 
2010, when he was working at one of his low-paying jobs. In 2013, Applicant began 
 
  7 
 
providing money and food to his father who had lost his job, resulting in Applicant falling 
behind in his financial obligations. In 2015, his father resumed working. The low paying 
jobs and his father’s two-year period of unemployment warrant some mitigation under 
the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
However, to receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), an applicant must produce 
evidence that shows he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been 
working for his current employer since February 2015. When his father returned to work 
in 2015, Applicant no longer had to support him. Assuming that the payment amounts 
posted and corresponding dates in AE A were in fact payments, Applicant made only 
four payments to the servicer in 2015, only six payments in 2016, only four  payments in 
2017, and only one payment in January 2018, although it is highly unlikely the payment 
was $32,176 as is posted in AE A. Applicant does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b) because his evidence fails to show consistent payment documentation on his 
student loans since 2013.  
 
 Applicant has never had financial counseling. Though AE A reflects that he has 
been in contact with the student loan servicer identified at SOR 1.a, there is no 
evidence to support a conclusion that his delinquent student loans and medical 
accounts are under control. With scant documentation of payments or payment plans, I 
am unable to conclude that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay his debts. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are not mitigated or excused by his work-related travel 
schedule or his uncorroborated claims of having the student loan debts consolidated. 
AG¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns related to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
  
Under AG ¶ 16, the applicable disqualifying conditions are:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
  8 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.  
 
 Concerning SOR 2.a and 2.b, Applicant denied in his October 2016 e-QIP that he 
had federal debt and that any of his debts had been turned over to a collection agency 
in the past seven (7) years. Those two negative answers were false. Applicant informed 
the OPM investigator in May 2017 that his omissions were inadvertent. In his February 
2018 answer to SOR 2.a and 2.b, he admitted both allegations. During the hearing, he 
explained that he provided a negative answer to SOR 2.a because he thought that SOR 
1.a and 1.g through 1.l student loan accounts were consolidated and current. He 
provided no evidence to support that claim. He defended his negative response to SOR 
2.b by claiming that his review of a December 2015 credit report showed no collection 
accounts. That claim is not credible as the Government credit reports show that 11 of 
the 13 accounts listed in the SOR had become delinquent by December 2015. 
Considering Applicant’s inconsistent explanations for his negative responses, and the 
absence of supporting documentation for either response, I conclude that Applicant 
deliberately falsified his October 2016 e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant did not make prompt, good-faith efforts to the falsification before being 
confronted with the information that the OPM investigator presented to him in May 2017. 
At the September 2018 hearing, Applicant advanced two claims for the October 2016 
omissions that are not credible. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Even though almost three 
years have passed since the falsifications, Applicant has provided insufficient evidence 
to establish that his conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. AG ¶17(d) 
does not apply because Applicant has not acknowledged that he falsified the 
Government security application.  
 
 
 
 
  9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have examined the evidence under the guidelines for financial considerations 
and personal conduct in the context of the nine general factors of the whole-person 
concept listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old and single. In September 2008, he earned an 
associate’s degree in business and collision refinishing. After working several low-
paying jobs between 2006 and 2014, Applicant began working as a service technician 
for his current employer in February 2015. From 2013 to 2015, Applicant discovered he 
was having problems paying his bills because he was providing monetary assistance 
and food to his unemployed father. His father resumed working in 2015.  
 
In his October 2016 e-QIP, Applicant deliberately falsified the e-QIP by denying 
he had federal delinquent debt and that he had debts turned over to collection agencies 
in the last seven years. He stated in his May 2017 PSI that the omissions were 
inadvertent and he intended to contact the creditors and repay the debts. He provided 
some evidence of occasional payments to a student loan servicer. But, he provided no 
evidence of payments on the student loans since January 2018.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has noted under the financial considerations guideline 
that an applicant should demonstrate a “meaningful track record” of payments that 
shows overall debt reduction. Though Applicant is not required to demonstrate he has 
paid off all debts listed in the SOR, he should show that he has a plan to repay the 
delinquent debts and has taken consistent steps to implement the plan. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
   
While AE A shows sporadic payments on Applicant’s student loans between 
2013 and January 2018, the exhibit provides no information showing to which listed 
student loan debts the payments apply. The exhibit does not show whether any of the 
student loan debts have been returned to a current status or placed in forbearance or 
rehabilitation. The record contains no evidence that Applicant has taken any action to 
 
  10 
 
pay off the medical accounts, even though he has discretionary income of $400 to $500 
every month. Judging by the totality of the evidence, Applicant has not overcome the 
security concerns based on the guidelines for financial considerations and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
Paul J. Mason 
Administrative Judge 
