1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No.  17-01859 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Skyler Samp, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
History of the Case 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications (SCA) on December 15, 2010, 
and February 24, 2016. On August 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline E, (Personal 
Conduct). Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on October 9, 2017, and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. On December 21, 2017, a complete copy of the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant.1 He 
received the FORM on December 27, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. On February 14, 2018, Applicant submitted a 
supplemental Answer to the SOR and FORM, which I labeled Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
There were no objections to Items 1 through 6 or AE A, and they are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 7, 2018. 
1 The SOR and Applicant’s answer to the SOR were submitted by Department Counsel as Item 1. I labeled 
his response as “Answer”. 
04/03/2019
 
 2 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He has been married since August 2015 and has no 
children. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2005. He has worked as a federal contractor 
since September 2005 and has held a security clearance since approximately 2006 or 
2007.2 Applicant has worked for his current employer, as a system software engineer, 
since October 2015. (Item 2)  
 
 Between March 2000 and January 2014, Applicant was arrested or charged eight 
times with various crimes or infractions. He was charged with alcohol-related offenses 
five times. He was also charged with a felony-level destruction of property offense, 
reckless driving, and driving without a license. He purchased drugs in 2010, while holding 
a security clearance, and he used marijuana in 2014, while holding a clearance. 
Additionally, Applicant falsified his February 2016 SCA regarding his criminal history and 
drug use. In his initial Answer to the SOR that described these facts, Applicant denied all 
of the allegations, with explanation. (Item 1, Answer) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d allege that Applicant was charged with public intoxication 
four times between March 2000 and December 2002, while he was in college. He was 
involved in a bar fight during one of those incidents. Applicant disclosed the September 
2000 and October 2002 incidents during his March 2010 personal subject interview (PSI). 
During that interview, he claimed he had no other alcohol-related incidents or arrests, 
which was untrue.3 Applicant disclosed all four arrests in his December 2010 SCA, but in 
his February 2016 SCA, he did not disclose the December 2002 incident.4 In his Answer, 
Applicant admitted the underlying conduct, but denied the allegations. He argued that all 
of these SOR allegations should have been alleged under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption) or Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). (Item 1, Answer at 4-7; Item 2 at 54-56; 
Item 3 at 6-7, 13, 22-23; Item 4 at 53-55) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleged that, in February 2006, Applicant was charged with driving 
without a license, driving without registration, and driving on a suspended license. At the 
time of the arrest, his license was suspended because he had several outstanding parking 
tickets and he did not have the funds to register his vehicle. He was found guilty and spent 
three days in jail. In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegation, but admitted the 
underlying conduct. (Item 1, Answer at 7-8; Item 3 at 5-6, 13, 21; Item 4 at 53) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleged that Applicant was arrested and charged with felony-level 
destruction of property in July 2009. He claimed that early in the morning, after he left a 
club, he was assaulted by a group of young men. His girlfriend, who was with him, called 
                                                          
2 Applicant was briefly unemployed between July 2010 and October 2010. 
 
3 Because Applicant’s failure to tell the truth to the investigator was not alleged in the SOR, I will only 
consider this information as a factor in evaluating credibility, mitigation, and whole–person factors. 
 
4 Because Applicant’s failure to disclose the December 2002 incident in his SCA was not alleged in the 
SOR, I will only consider this information as a factor in evaluating credibility, mitigation, and whole–person 
factors. 
 
 3 
the police, and they gave statements. After the police left the scene, the men returned, 
and Applicant broke the window of their vehicle. He was subsequently arrested, but the 
charges were dismissed by a judge the next day. Applicant disclosed this arrest in his 
February 2016 SCA. In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegation, and the underlying 
criminal conduct. Additionally, he argued that the incident should have been alleged under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). (Item 1, Answer at 8; Item 2 at 52-53; Item 3 at 4-5, 13, 
22; Item 4 at 52-53; Item 6 at 4) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleged that, in September 2010, Applicant purchased cocaine in the 
form of a “Thai stick”. He was not employed at this time, but he still held a security 
clearance. He disclosed information regarding this incident in his December 2010 SCA, 
and during his 2011 PSI, and 2017 PSI. While Applicant was in Las Vegas with his 
girlfriend on vacation, they attempted to identify drug users on the street by the way 
people appeared, and they decided to see if they could purchase drugs from a stranger. 
Applicant asked the strangest person he saw if he could purchase cocaine from him. 
When the person said yes, Applicant claimed he told the individual that he was just joking, 
because he did not really intend to purchase drugs. However, according to Applicant, the 
individual made Applicant go to an ATM and withdraw money for the cocaine. After the 
sale was completed, Applicant claimed he destroyed the cocaine and did not use it. In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted the underlying conduct, but claimed he was coerced into the 
purchase. Additionally, he claimed that this incident occurred in September 2012, which 
is inconsistent with his disclosures in his 2010 SCA and 2011 PSI. Applicant asserted 
that this allegation should have been alleged under Guideline H (Drug Involvement or 
Substance Abuse) (Item 1, Answer at 8-9; Item 2 at 57-59; Item 3 at 14, 24, 28) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleged that, in June 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
driving while intoxicated, first offense; driving under the influence (DUI); and operating 
while impaired. He did not disclose this arrest in his 2016 SCA. During his February 2017 
PSI, the investigator confronted Applicant regarding his arrest history twice, before he 
questioned Applicant about this arrest.5 Applicant told the investigator that after leaving a 
bar, he ran a red light, and was pulled over by law enforcement. According to Applicant, 
he passed the field sobriety test, but was arrested and taken to the police station. He 
claimed he never heard anything from the arresting agency after the arrest. Applicant told 
the investigator that he thought the incident was outside the reporting period. Additionally, 
he stated he was unaware that he was charged with an offense or that the arrest would 
be on his record. In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegation, because he claimed he 
passed the field sobriety tests. (Item 1, Answer at 9-10; Item 3 at 28; Item 6 at 4-5) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleged that, in November 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with reckless driving. He pled guilty to this charge in March 2014, and was ordered to pay 
a $500 fine and costs. Applicant did not disclose this arrest in his 2016 SCA, or during 
                                                          
5 Because Applicant’s failure to be truthful and forthcoming with the investigator was not alleged in the SOR, 
I will only consider this information as a factor in evaluating credibility, mitigation, and whole–person factors. 
 
 
 4 
the January 2017 PSI or February 2017 PSI.6 In his Answer to the SOR, he denied the 
allegation, and claimed the arresting officer did not use a radar gun; therefore, there was 
no evidence that his speeding rose to the level of reckless driving. He asserted that the 
underlying conduct should have been alleged under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). (Item 
1, Answer at 9-10; Item 3; Item 5 at 1) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j alleged that Applicant used marijuana, multiple times during the summer 
of 2014, while holding a security clearance. He told the government investigator that he 
used marijuana with his siblings and their spouses. In his Answer, he denied the allegation 
because he believed the underlying conduct should have been alleged under Guideline 
H (Drug Involvement or Substance Misuse). Additionally, he claimed he no longer uses 
marijuana. (Item 3 at 23-24) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.m alleged that in his February 2016 SCA, Applicant failed to 
disclose the June 2012 DUI arrest, the January 2014 reckless driving arrest, and his 2014 
use of marijuana. During his February 2017 PSI, Applicant told the investigator that he 
did not disclose his 2014 marijuana use in his February 2016 SCA because he forgot that 
he used marijuana in 2014. In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegations, because he 
claimed he was “rushing when he completed the form.” (Item 3 at 28) 
 
In his supplemental Answer to the SOR and FORM, Applicant claimed he did not 
disclose the June 2012 DUI arrest and 2014 drug use in his 2016 PSA because he 
misunderstood the term, “charged and convicted,” which does not appear in the question 
to which he falsely responded. He also claimed he did not disclose the 2014 reckless 
driving arrest because he did not know he was fined more than $300. (AE A) 
 
 During Applicant’s March 2010 PSI, Applicant discussed his earlier disclosure of 
drug use that included use of marijuana approximately three times in October 2000, 
mushrooms two times in April 2001, and ecstasy twice in October 2001. Applicant told 
the investigator that he did not intend to try or experiment with drugs ever again. During 
his March 2011 PSI, Applicant reaffirmed the extent of his previous drug use, and claimed 
that he did not intend to ever use drugs again.7 (Item 3 at 8-9, 14-15) 
 
 In January 2017, Applicant was confronted by an investigator regarding the full 
extent of his drug history. He admitted he used marijuana three times between 1995 and 
2003; he used mushrooms six times between March 2000 and March 2004; he used 
ecstasy five times between October 2001 and March 2003; and he used cocaine once in 
2000.8 (Item 3 at 23-24) 
                                                          
6 Because Applicant’s failure to disclose this arrest to the investigator was not alleged in the SOR, I will only 
consider this information as a factor in evaluating credibility, mitigation, and whole–person factors. 
 
7 Because Applicant’s failure to be truthful regarding his drug use during his PSIs was not alleged in the 
SOR, I will only consider this information as a factor in evaluating credibility, mitigation, and whole–person 
factors. 
 
8 Because Applicant’s involvement with drugs prior to 2010 was not alleged in the SOR, I will only consider 
this information as a factor in evaluating credibility, mitigation, and whole–person factors. 
 
 5 
 Applicant submitted three employment-related awards and an October 2017 
certificate that he completed a drug and alcohol course. He also submitted two letters of 
recommendation. There is no evidence as to whether Applicant disclosed his 2014 arrest 
and 2014 drug use to his facility security officer or company. (Item 1, Answer at 19, 20, 
22-25) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”9 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”10 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”11 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”12 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
                                                          
 
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
10 Egan at 527. 
 
11 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
12 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
 
 6 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.13 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”14 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.15 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
alleged facts.16 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.17 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”18 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”19 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under Guideline E is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable under the established facts in this 
case: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
                                                          
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
14 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
16 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 7 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
Applicant intentionally failed to disclose adverse criminal information and drug use 
in his February 2016 SCA. He was either ticketed or arrested eight times between 2000 
and 2014. He used drugs on more than one occasion while holding a security clearance. 
His history of misconduct, when considered as a whole, raises serious security concerns 
and demonstrates his questionable judgment, lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(c) are established.20 
 
 AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstance that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressor, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant did not disclose two arrests, or his use of marijuana, while holding a 
clearance, in his February 2016 SCA. Additionally, he did not disclose the full extent of 
his criminal history and drug use until he was confronted multiple times by investigators 
in 2017. Applicant did not demonstrate a prompt or good-faith effort to correct his 
omissions, concealment, or falsifications before he was confronted with the facts. There 
is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG  ¶ 17(a). 
 
                                                          
20 Applicant denied the allegations alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j on the basis 
that they should have been alleged under different guidelines. Based on the evidence, including the history 
and the pattern of Applicant’s offenses, evaluating these security concerns under Guideline E is 
appropriate. 
 
 8 
Applicant asserted, in his February 2017 PSI, Answer, and supplemental Answer, 
that he did not intentionally falsify his 2016 SCA. He claimed that he forgot about his 
arrests and his drug use, even though the incidents occurred only two years before he 
completed his most recent SCA. Applicant was an educated and experienced 
professional when he completed the 2016 SCA. This was not his first security clearance 
application, having completed one in 2010, and another prior to 2010. The evidence as a 
whole reflects that he was aware of his arrest history and drug use when he completed 
his most recent SCA. Applicant’s inconsistent explanations for failing to disclose adverse 
information lack credibility, and do not alleviate concerns as to his trustworthiness, 
judgment, candor, integrity, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. His 
failure to disclose requested information is serious, as is his pattern of misconduct over 
the years. There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG  ¶ 17(c). 
 
Applicant attended an eight hour drug and alcohol educational class in October 
2017, shortly after the SOR was issued. This provides minimal mitigation, due to the 
timing of the counseling and the fact that Applicant used drugs while holding a clearance, 
and when he was in his mid-thirties. The evidence does not establish persuasive 
mitigation under AG  ¶ 17(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Applicant is an educated and experienced professional, as evidenced by his letter 
of recommendation and performance awards. His lengthy history of questionable 
judgment, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and lack of candor when 
completing government forms and during government interviews, leaves me with doubt 
as to his ability to protect classified and sensitive information. He concealed derogatory 
information multiple times from the government, and his varied and inconsistent 
explanations lack credibility. 
 
 
 9 
 Many of the allegations are related to behavior that occurred when Applicant was 
young and immature. However, the criminal behavior continued until four or five years 
ago, and Applicant made false statements to investigators as recently as two years ago. 
His behavior established a lengthy pattern of rule violations, and a failure to cooperate or 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security 
concerns at issue. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of the United States to grant him national security 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. National 
security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
