KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge cited to Applicant’s earlier Response to the FORM in support of his
findings about this debt.  Applicant contends that the Judge’s citation to the Response was an
error because the Response was never admitted into evidence.  We find this argument to be
persuasive.  At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Applicant’s security clearance
application, interview summary, and credit reports, which the Judge admitted.  Applicant offered
two letters, which the Judge admitted.  Neither party offered the Response, although it is located
in the case file. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 17-03627.a1
DATE: 04/01/2019
DATE: April 1, 2019
In Re:
------------------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 17-03627
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Danel A. Dufresne, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On November 27, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  After receiving the File of Relevant Material (FORM) and submitting a response
thereto, Applicant requested that the case be converted to a hearing.  On December 26, 2018, after
the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Richard A.
Cefola denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact were
supported by substantial evidence, whether the Judge based his decision on information not
contained in the record, and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand the case to the Judge.
The SOR alleged four delinquent debts.  The one allegation that the Judge found adversely
to Applicant pertained to a $30,000 Federal tax lien.  The Judge cited to Applicant’s earlier
Response to the FORM in support of his findings about this debt.  Applicant contends that the
Judge’s citation to the Response was an error because the Response was never admitted into
evidence.  We find this argument to be persuasive.  At the hearing, Department Counsel offered
Applicant’s security clearance application, interview summary, and credit reports, which the Judge
admitted.  Tr. at 8.  Applicant offered two letters, which the Judge admitted.  Tr. at 9.  Neither party
offered the Response, although it is located in the case file.    
Therefore, it was error for the Judge to have cited to the challenged document in making his
findings of security concern.1  We conclude that the best resolution is to remand the case to the
1 Directive ¶ E3.1.7 provides that, if neither party requests a hearing, the case shall be assigned to a Judge “for
a clearance decision based on the written record.”  It further provides that Department Counsel shall provide the applicant
with all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing (generally referred to as the File of Relevant
Material or FORM) and applicant shall have an opportunity to respond to it.  The Directive envisions that the FORM
and the applicant’s response will be part of the written record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.8 also provides that, if either party
requests a hearing, the Judge shall base the clearance decision on the “hearing record.”  The Directive does not address
the conversion of a FORM proceeding into a hearing and provides no guidance how to treat a partial or full written
record that was created before the hearing conversion.  Regarding this issue, we note a party’s FORM submission often
contains arguments, which are not evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03392 at 2, n.3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2015).
In the Reply Brief, Department Counsel acknowledges that “it would have been better practice to have admitted
Applicant’s response into evidence.”   Reply Brief at 8.  We agree the better practice would have been for the Judge to
have clarified the evidentiary status of that document at the hearing.  Department Counsel also argues the previously
submitted FORM (which presumably includes Applicant’s FORM response) was part of the record and the Judge had
access to it.  While the argument that the parties’ previous submissions pertaining to the SOR allegations are part of the
evidentiary record and should have been considered by the Judge in rendering a decision is not an unreasonable
interpretation of the Directive, Department Counsel’s handling of some FORM documents at the hearing undercuts that
argument.  At the hearing, Department Counsel offered documents from the FORM into evidence as Government
2
Judge to give the parties a chance to offer the Response or object to its admission, as appropriate. 
The Judge will then issue a new decision consistent with the Directive.  The other issues that
Applicant has raised are not ripe for our consideration.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.      
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Exhibits 1-3.  If those documents were already in the record and should have been considered by the Judge in rendering
a decision, why would Department Counsel need to offer them again and seek to obtain a ruling from the Judge on their
admissibility?  Based on our review of the record, confusion exists whether Applicant’s FORM response was in the
record for evidentiary purposes.  As a matter of fairness, the Judge should have discussed this issue with the parties at
the hearing, given them the option of offering or not offering the FORM response into evidence, and then proceeded
accordingly.  
3
