 
 
______________ 
______________ 
  
  
 
  
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No.  17-03081 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bill Ekiss, Esq. 
04/08/2019 
Decision 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.
History of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 5, 2015. On 
September 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant
answered the SOR on December 28, 2017, and requested a decision on the record 
without a hearing. 
On February 12, 2018, a complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant. He received the FORM on April 12, 2018. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant was given an extension, and responded to the FORM on June 15, 2018 with a 
letter (Response) and seven Applicant Exhibits (AE 1-7). The case was assigned to me 
on September 14, 2018. 
1 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
I sent emails to Applicant and Department Counsel on December 3, 2018 and 
asked for clarification regarding the status of the alleged debts, because the most recent 
credit bureau reports (CBR) did not support the conclusion that the alleged debts had 
been resolved. I held the record open until December 11, 2018 for either party to submit
updated documentation. 
On December 11, 2018, Applicant’s counsel sent me an email regarding
Applicant’s student loans’ status, but did not provide supporting documentation. On 
December 12, 2018, I emailed both parties and asked if Applicant’s counsel wished to 
submit supporting documentation regarding the student loans’ status, because it was not
clear from Applicant’s Exhibits if the student loans were deferred or outstanding.
Additionally, I noted that the submitted documents did not provide proof of resolution for
the debts that no longer appeared in the CBRs. I set a new suspense date of December 
18, 2018 for submission of documentation. 
On December 18, 2018, Applicant’s counsel sent an email and requested 
additional time to submit documentation regarding Applicant’s student loan status. He 
also stated, “As you and I both know, absent the payment of an account it will not be 
removed by the credit bureau.” On January 2, 2019, Applicant submitted a letter dated, 
December 31, 2018 from one of the companies servicing Applicant’s student loans. This 
letter has been marked as AE 8. The email correspondence has been marked as FORM 
Exhibit (FE) I. Items 1 through 6 and AE 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant is 43 years old and has worked as an assembly-line mechanic for a 
defense contractor since February 2015. He was married from 2000 until he divorced in 
2002, and he has two adult sons from that relationship. Applicant also has full custody of 
his minor daughter from another relationship. Applicant has attended some college. (Item
3; Item 6; Response) 
Applicant experienced problems related to custody issues. Until approximately 
2003 or 2004, Applicant and his ex-wife shared joint custody of their two sons, and he 
paid her $640 a month in child support. At that time, she abandoned their children with 
Applicant. As a result of the ensuing custody battle, Applicant received full custody of their 
children, and his ex-wife was ordered to pay $264 in monthly support. Applicant’s arrears
were forgiven, because his ex-wife did not make her child-support payments. (Item 6 at 
6-8; AE 1; AE 3) 
Applicant’s daughter was born in 2004. He was unaware that he had a daughter 
until 2006 when his daughter’s mother notified him. At that time, he was approximately 
$6,000 in arrears for child support, and he was required to pay $406 a month, plus $204 
for arrears. In 2008, he obtained full custody of his daughter, and the court held that any
arrears that existed at that time were waived. (Item 6 at 8-9; AE 2) 
2 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
                                                          
 
  
Applicant also experienced medical issues that negatively affected his finances. In 
2007, Applicant was in an automobile accident and broke both of his legs. He  was
unemployed from January 2010 to February 2015. During this period, he took classes
and cared for ill family members and his children. He was supported by his parents and 
state aid. In June 2016, Applicant started to experience seizures and took a 22-month 
medical leave of absence from his employer. He was paid approximately 50% of his salary 
for six months and was unpaid for the next sixteen months. He returned to work in April 
2018. (Item 3 at 11; Item 6 at 2, 3, 12-14; Response; AE 6; AE 7)  
The SOR alleged that Applicant has twenty delinquent debts, totaling almost 
$25,000. The debts became delinquent between approximately 2010 and 2016 when he 
was unemployed. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6) Applicant admitted to all of the alleged debts in 
his Answer, with no explanation. In his Response, he claimed most of the debts were
resolved. To support his claim that many of the non-student loan debts were resolved, he 
provided three credit bureau reports (CBR). Many of the older debts no longer appear in 
the 2018 CBRs. (AE 4) 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h are five government student loan accounts 
totaling $13,158. They were opened between 2010 and 2012, and they were assigned 
for government collection in 2016. In his May 2015 SCA, Applicant indicated that he was
working to resolve his student loans, and they were all deferred until June 2017. During 
his October 2016 personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant told the investigator that his 
loans were still deferred and might be forgiven. (Item 4 at 1-2; Item 6 at 14-16)   
The alleged delinquent student loan debts appear in a CBR dated August 30, 2017. 
(Item 4) Applicant submitted credit bureau reports (CBR) from each of the credit bureaus, 
all of which were dated June 12, 2018. (AE 4) In these CBRs, Applicant appears to have 
more than five student loans, and the student loans alleged in the SOR remain delinquent. 
There are several additional student loans that appear as deferred by two companies that
service both private and federal student loans. Applicant submitted a letter dated
December 2018, from one of these companies. The letter indicated that all of Applicant’s 
loans in “Group G” are in forbearance status until March 2019. It is unclear from the letter
which of his alleged student loans are included in the forbearance program. The letter
does not list the loans or the amounts placed in forbearance.1 Additionally, the account 
numbers and balances listed in Item 4 are inconsistent with the account numbers and 
balances listed in AE 4. It is unclear from the record evidence how many student loans 
Applicant has and which are deferred or are in forbearance. (Item 4; AE 4; AE 8) 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t are all 
delinquent medical debts totaling $11,175. They became delinquent between 2011 and 
2014. SOR ¶ 1.l is a $117 delinquent phone account. (Item 4; Item 5)  
1 The December 2018 letter submitted by Applicant lists only one account. His counsel submitted an email 
claiming all of the delinquent student loans are included in forbearance, but did not provide detailed
documentation to support his assertions. (AE 8; HE I) 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
In Applicant’s Response, he claimed that only three of the alleged non-student loan 
debts remain unpaid (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.i). The three debts appear as delinquent in 
AE 4, and their combined current outstanding balance is $1,252. (Item 4; Item 5; Equifax 
at 32-33; Transunion at 13; Experian at 2) Applicant did not provide proof of payment or 
resolution of the other alleged non-student loan debts. His counsel stated that debts are 
removed by credit agencies when they are paid. However, debts may no longer appear 
on credit reports for a variety of reasons: the debt may be beyond the seven-year 
reporting period; the creditor has taken a loss on the debt; a new creditor may have 
purchased the debt; or the debt was paid. 
Applicant submitted a pay stub and a budget worksheet. According to the 
documentation, his income exceeds his monthly expenses. (AE 5) He also submitted 11 
letters of recommendation from family members and others who have worked with him 
and known him for many years. Several of these individuals hold or have held DOD 
security clearances. They describe Applicant as trustworthy, reliable, honest, responsible,
dependable, and ambitious. (AE 7)  
Policies 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”2 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”3 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”4 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position
(AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative judge 
must consider all available and reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable.
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible  
2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
3  Egan at 527.
4 EO 10865 § 2. 
4 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”5 Thus,
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for
issuing national security eligibility. 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”7 The guidelines presume a nexus, or rational 
connection, between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.8 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.9 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.10 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”11 “[S]ecurity
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12 
Analysis 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under Guideline F is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
5 EO 10865 § 7. 
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
7 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).
8 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b).
5 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also  be  
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
Applicant’s admissions and his credit reports establish two disqualifying conditions
under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of 
not meeting financial obligations”).  
AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate those security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Over the years, Applicant has experienced several personal and professional 
setbacks that were beyond his control. His medical debt and student loans are not 
examples of reckless or irresponsible spending, or poor financial habits. However, he still 
has a responsibility to pay debts that he incurred, and he failed to meet his burden of 
production and persuasion to show he paid the debts as he claimed. There is no record 
evidence that he has made payments toward the alleged debts. Applicant argued that the 
information in the CBRs should be interpreted in a manner most favorable to him.
However, it is unclear if the student loans alleged in the SOR are currently deferred or if 
they are in default.
Applicant was given ample time and opportunities to provide documentation to 
support his claims that he has paid many of the alleged non-student loan debts, but the 
only documentation he provided was in the form of CBRs. Many of his debts no longer 
appear in the most recent CBRs. However, the absence of a debt from a CBR does not
prove that the debt has been paid or resolved. As discussed above, debts are removed 
from CBRs for a variety of reasons. Because the record lacks of evidence to support 
6 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
   
   
  
  
 
   
Applicant’s claims, he has not demonstrated that he has made a good-faith effort to repay
his overdue creditors or resolve his debts.13 
There is insufficient evidence to show that his finances are in good standing and 
he acted responsibly to address numerous delinquent debts. Applicant provided no 
evidence of credit counseling. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) was not 
established. 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person.
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, including his many glowing letters of recommendation, I
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns at issue. The record lacks 
sufficient evidence to demonstrate that he has resolved the alleged delinquent debts. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security of the United States to grant him eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
13  The absence of documentation to corroborate claims of satisfying debts is relevant in deciding whether 
such claims should be accepted. ISCR Case No. 98-0419 at 4 (April 30, 1999) In concluding Administrative
Judge failed to take into account an applicant's failure to provide documentation to support his general
statements about his financial interests, the Board noted an applicant reasonably can be expected to have 
or be able to get documentation concerning his financial interests such as income, checking and savings 
accounts, business assets, and accrued retirement funds. ISCR Case No. 00-0104 (App. Bd., March 21,
2001.) 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
__________________________ 
 
 
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t: Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
8 
