1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No: 18-01804 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has a history of failing to timely file Federal and state tax returns. He 
owes a Federal agency a large debt for the overpayment of benefits he received. He did 
not mitigate the resulting financial security concerns. National security eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On August 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
04/23/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 24, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge (Answer). The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 7, 2019. On February 12, 2019, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the hearing for February 26, 2019. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, 
and location of his hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 9))  
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits. Applicant did not did 
not object to the Department’s exhibits, or offer any exhibits on his own behalf. The 
Department’s exhibits were admitted into evidence. The record remained open until 
March 15, 2019, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents. None 
were provided. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on March 6, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the three allegations contained in the SOR. He provided 
documents related to the allegations with his Answer.  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and married to his wife for 30 years. He has three adult 
children. He has been working in the field of welding since he was 20 years old. He began 
his current position, as a welder, with a defense contractor two years ago. Prior to this 
job, he worked for private companies. (Tr. 18-21) 
 
  In May 2017, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). In it, he disclosed that he failed to file Federal and state tax returns 
for tax year 2015. He also disclosed that he owed the Social Security Administration 
(SSA) $33,575 for overpayments he received for disability benefits. (GE 1) During an 
October 2018 interview with a government investigator, Applicant volunteered that he had 
not filed tax returns for 2007, 2008, 2009, and a couple other years. He stated that he 
had received social security disability (SSI) benefits for a couple years following hernia 
surgery, and owed the SSA about $33,000 in overpayments. He said he was repaying 
the debt with monthly payments of $10. (GE 5) 
 
 Applicant testified that his tax filing problems began with tax year 2007. He did not 
timely file those returns because he did not think he would have enough money to pay 
his taxes, and then he began procrastinating year after year. At some point, he thought 
he may be dead before he needed to pay his taxes because he had begun to use heroin. 
He continued to use heroin into 2010 when he sought treatment and stopped using the 
illegal substance. He also had cardiac surgery around the same time. (Tr. 22-23, 26) He 
admitted that his tax problems eventually “spiraled out of control.” (Tr. 24)  
 
 Applicant began collecting disability after his 2010 surgery. He received payments 
during 2011, 2012, and 2013, during which time he was also working. He thought he could 
earn more money than the regulations permitted while on disability. Subsequently, he 
received notice that he owed the SSA over $33,000. He said he established a monthly 
repayment plan of $50 in 2016. That amount was reduced to $10 a month in October 
 
 
 
 
3 
2018 after he was laid off from a position. As of October 2018, the balance was $33,395, 
and his monthly payments were listed as $10. (Tr. 27-31; Answer) 
  
 Applicant admitted that he did not timely file Federal and state income tax returns 
for the following years: 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016. (Tr. 34, 39, 41, 
44-49) All of those returns were filed between October and November 2018.1 (Tr. 39, 50, 
54) He has not filed Federal or state income tax returns for 2009 due to some confusion 
with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which filed a return for him and assessed unpaid 
taxes for 2009. (Tr. 44, 50) He timely filed tax returns for 2006, 2012, 2014, and 2017. 
(Tr. 45, 47, 50) 
 
 Applicant owes the IRS about $13,000 for unpaid taxes for years: 2007, 2008, 
2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2016. He does not know how much he owes for 2017. 2  (Tr. 
50-51) He recently requested a payment plan with the IRS. He offered to make monthly 
payments of $100 to the IRS. He has not received a response. (Tr. 51)  
 
 Applicant owes his state department of revenue about $475 for unpaid income 
taxes for the above-alleged years. He has not contacted the state to establish a payment 
plan, but is waiting to hear from it. (Tr. 52-54) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                            
1Initially, Applicant sent his unfiled Federal tax returns to the IRS in September 2018; however, some of 
them were unsigned and the IRS returned them to him for his signature. He resubmitted those returns 
between October and November 2018. He filed his state returns at the same time.  
 
2I have not considered for disqualifying purposes any derogatory information that was not alleged in the 
SOR regarding Applicant’s unpaid taxes. I may consider the information when making a credibility 
determination, in applying the mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused by or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19 sets out disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file Federal and state income tax returns for tax years: 
2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016. He incurred a debt with the SSA 
after receiving overpayments for his disability in 2011, 2012, and 2013, which he was not 
entitled to receive. That debt has a large outstanding balance and is being minimally 
addressed. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets out four conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant did not timely file Federal and state tax returns for eight years between 
2007 and 2016. His failure to timely file those years until the fall of 2018 casts doubt on 
his current judgment and reliability. He continues to owe the SSA a large amount of 
money for disability payments that he was not entitled to receive. AG ¶ 20(a) minimally 
applies.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that his heroin addiction and procrastination contributed 
to his failure to timely file tax returns. Those were circumstances within his control. He did 
 
 
 
 
6 
not provide a sufficient or credible explanation for receiving disability payments for three 
years while he was working. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
In 2016, Applicant began repaying SSA $50 a month for disability payments that 
he wrongly received between 2011 and 2013. There is no exhibit confirming the original 
amount owed to the SSA or documenting the payments, he said he made for two years. 
In October 2018, that payment amount was reduced to $10 a month. There is no 
document confirming that he made those payments up to February 26, 2019, the date of 
the hearing. The evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). As of this 
hearing, Applicant has not entered into a payment plan for unpaid Federal and state 
income taxes. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security eligibility 
must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old man who has worked for a defense contractor for two 
years. Prior to obtaining this position, he had a long history of failing to file or pay Federal 
and state income taxes. Between September and November 2018, he filed eight years of 
returns. He has not established payment plans for his unpaid taxes. He said he has been 
making small payments to the SSA for monies that he wrongfully obtained; however, he 
did not provide sufficient evidence to conclude that those payments have been consistent 
over the years or the amount of the original debt. Applicant has not established a track 
record of responsibly managing taxes and other financial obligations. His history of non-
 
 
 
 
7 
compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to file tax returns and timely pay tax debts 
raises security concerns. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).3  
   
The record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s judgment and 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                            
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
