1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02064 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on September 11, 2018, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
December 18, 2018.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 21, 2018, scheduling the hearing for January 25, 2019. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  
04/03/2019
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 2, and 4 through 7 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. The objection to GE 3 was sustained. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. 
The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted 
documents that I have marked AE F and G and admitted without objection. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR by adding an allegation was 
granted without objection. SOR ¶ 1.e reads as follows: 
 
You are indebted to the state of [redacted] for delinquent taxes in the 
amount of at least $4,000 for tax year 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old self-employed consultant for a defense contractor. He 
has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 1996. He is married with two children.1 
 
 In about 2004, Applicant decided to invest in real estate. He bought 
condominiums in about 2004 and 2006, before the real estate market crashed. He had 
periods of unemployment and underemployment and renters who did not pay their rent. 
He was unable to pay the mortgage loans and other debts. Both properties were lost to 
foreclosure in about 2014 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). There is no evidence of any deficiency 
balances owed on the properties. An April 2015 credit report lists both mortgage loans 
as account closed with a foreclosure and a $0 balance.2 
 
 The April 2015 credit report lists several debts that had been paid or settled. It 
also lists a credit card that was $4,943 past due with a $5,012 balance (SOR ¶ 1.d). The 
credit union obtained a judgment against Applicant in 2010. Applicant paid and satisfied 
the judgment in September 2015.3 
 
 Applicant always worked as a salaried employee (W-2) until he started working 
as a consultant and an independent contractor (1099) in 2015. As a salaried employee, 
taxes were withheld from his paycheck during the year. As an independent contractor, 
he was responsible for his own taxes, including paying quarterly estimated taxes. He 
was not as educated about the tax laws as he should have been, and he did not pay the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 41, 51; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-20, 33-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 20; Applicant’s response to SOR; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4, 5; AE B, C. 
 
 
3 
 
quarterly taxes in the mistaken belief that he could pay the taxes by the standard April 
15th deadline.4 
 
 In 2017, Applicant paid the taxes owed for tax year 2016. He received a pay 
raise in 2017, and he still did not pay the quarterly taxes. Applicant had a professional 
prepare his and his wife’s joint tax returns for 2017 in February 2018. The federal return 
indicated that their tax liability for 2017 was $31,062. There was $6,507 withheld during 
the year from his wife’s paychecks, leaving a balance of $24,766. Their state tax return 
indicated they owed $5,967.5 
 
 Applicant’s and his wife’s tax liability for 2017 was much higher than he 
expected, and he was unable to pay it when their tax returns were filed. He paid the IRS 
$500 with the return and $3,500 in April and May 2018. He hired a different tax 
professional who filed amended returns on their behalf in June 2018. The IRS reduced 
their tax liability by $7,123. He paid an additional $3,000 to the IRS in August and 
September 2018. He established an installment agreement with the IRS in September 
2018. The agreement called for payments of $1,000 per month. Between September 
2018 and February 2019, he paid the IRS an additional $12,000, to completely pay his 
tax liability for 2017. He received a $492 refund.6 
 
 Applicant paid the IRS $13,044 in March 2019 for his 2018 taxes. In January 
2019, he paid his state $4,742 for taxes owed for 2017. He paid his state $4,928 in 
March 2019 for his 2018 taxes.7 
 
 Applicant’s current finances are in order. He is now aware of his requirements to 
pay quarterly taxes. He credibly testified that he will comply with all his tax 
responsibilities in the future.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 20-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 24, 44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 24-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7; AE A, D, F, G. 
 
7 Tr. at 22, 35-36, 44-45, 68; AE F, G. 
 
8 Tr. at 36-37, 40, 65-69; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6; AE C, E-G. 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including two foreclosed properties, 
a delinquent credit card debt, and unpaid taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s non-tax financial problems resulted from unemployment, 
underemployment, renters who did not pay their rent, and the collapse of the real estate 
market. Those events were beyond his control. His tax problems were not.  
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s investment properties were lost to foreclosure in about 2014. There is 
no evidence of any deficiency balances owed on the properties. He paid and satisfied 
the judgment for the debt alleged SOR ¶ 1.d in September 2015. He also paid or settled 
several debts that were not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant always worked as a salaried employee, and he was unsophisticated in 
the tax requirements of independent contractors. He fell behind on his federal and state 
income taxes, which raises some questions about his judgment. However, he started 
addressing the matter before the SOR was issued. All federal and state income taxes 
have been paid. His current finances are in order. He credibly testified that he will 
comply with his tax responsibilities in the future. 
 
 Applicant had a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he implemented that 
plan. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) are applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are partially 
applicable. Security concerns about Applicant’s finances are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
