1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01356 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant’s national security eligibility is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 12, 
2016. On May 29, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on June 18, 2018, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On October 29, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On 
04/11/2019
 
2 
 
 
December 31, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for January 15, 2019. 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but 
did not offer any documentation into evidence. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the 
record open until February 15, 2019. On January 22, 2019, Applicant offered three 
documents, which I labeled as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, B, and C, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2019. The 
record closed on February 15, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations cited as SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. Applicant is 56 years old. He has been married since 1995. 
He has two daughters, ages 23 and 21. He earned his bachelor’s degree in 2016. He 
has held a DOD security clearance since approximately 1997. He has been employed 
as an aviation project lead for a federal contractor since September 2007. His current 
salary is about $85,000, and his wife’s annual salary is about $30,000. (Tr. 13-16)  
 
Applicant and his spouse currently live in his parents’ home. His parents have 
agreed to allow them to live in their home for free until both of their granddaughters 
have graduated from college. Applicant pays rent for his two adult daughters, one who 
graduated from college in May 2018, and the younger one, now a senior in college. He 
estimated that he pays approximately $3,000 total each month for their rent, utilities, 
and food. He also pays for insurance on four cars, and for his daughters’ cell phone 
service. He recently started paying $210 a month for his oldest daughter’s student loan, 
which became due shortly after her 2018 college graduation. He is paying this amount 
currently until his daughter is established and can start paying for her student loans. (Tr. 
20-23, 41-42, 49)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleged in ¶ 1.a that Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 
2013. His liabilities totaled approximately $250,603. The bankruptcy was discharged in 
April 2018. Applicant’s financial issues are attributed to a real estate business his 
spouse started in approximately 2007. They also purchased a more expensive home 
that year, anticipating a second income from his spouse. Within a year or two, her real 
estate career ended after her business failed during the housing market crisis. In 
addition, in approximately 2010, his daughter suffered a sports-related injury, which 
required three surgeries. Without the anticipated income from his spouse, Applicant 
admitted they were living beyond their means. They started using credit cards to pay for 
their food and other living expenses. All of these factors contributed to Applicant’s 
decision to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2013. He made monthly payments to the 
 
3 
 
 
bankruptcy trustee through payroll deduction until the bankruptcy was successfully 
discharged in 2018. (Tr. 24-29, 31-32; GE 2)  
 
 The SOR alleged in ¶¶ 1.b-e, four student loans referred for collection with the 
Department of Education (DOE), with a combined total of $22,799. Applicant was a 
project lead with his employer working on DOD contracts. One of the DOD contracts 
required all project leads to have a bachelor’s degree. Applicant only had an associate’s 
degree. He took college classes online and graduated with his bachelor’s degree in 
2016. He took out student loans every semester for two years beginning in January 
2014 to pay for his classes. Two years of his Federal tax refunds were intercepted to 
pay the outstanding balance of his student loans. Beginning in June 2018, he started a 
rehabilitation loan agreement where he is to pay $329 a month for 11 consecutive 
months to rehabilitate his student loans. After his April 2019 payment, his loan will be 
considered rehabilitated and he can negotiate with the creditor for a lower monthly 
payment. Applicant’s monthly payments are automatically deducted from his bank 
account. He provided a copy of his student loan rehabilitation agreement on January 22, 
2019.  (Tr. 34-41, 48-49; AE A) 
 
The last delinquent debt alleged in the SOR (¶ 1.f) is a medical account in the 
amount of $147. In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he stated he was unaware of this 
account until the SOR was issued. In June 2018, he paid this account in full. He did not 
provide supporting documentation with his SOR response or during his hearing. 
Applicant provided a copy of his receipt on January 22, 2019. (Tr. 42-43; AE B) 
 
Applicant and his spouse established a revised monthly budget in January 2019 
after taking financial planning classes through their church. His youngest daughter will 
graduate from college in May 2019, and she expects to start working immediately 
thereafter. He expects a substantial decrease in their monthly expenses after they no 
longer have to pay her monthly expenses. With the new budget, Applicant’s income 
covers all of the monthly expenses. They use a cash envelope system which works well 
for them and prevents use of credit cards to pay for monthly bills. His wife pays for the 
family health insurance through her employment. Her monthly net pay is approximately 
$800, which they have been putting into a savings account. Applicant provided a copy 
of their monthly budget on January 22, 2019. (Tr. 50-52; AE C) 
 
Policies 
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties beginning in 2007, with the startup and 
subsequent failure of his wife’s real estate business, unexpected medical bills for his 
daughter’s surgeries, and the added expense of putting his two daughters through 
college. Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2013, and made monthly payments to 
the trustee, until it was successfully discharged in 2018. He accumulated over $26,000 
in student loans for his online college classes to keep his current position with his 
employer. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems, such as his wife’s business failure and his 
daughter’s unexpected medical expenses, were circumstances that were beyond his 
control. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, and he made consistent 
payments to the bankruptcy trustee until his bankruptcy was discharged in 2018. In 
June 2018, he entered into a student loan rehabilitation agreement with the DOE for his 
outstanding student loans in the amount of $26,000. He has consistently made his 
monthly installments in accordance with the agreement, and his student loans will be 
rehabilitated in April 2019. He immediately paid a delinquent medical debt that he had 
not known existed. He has taken financial planning classes through his church, and 
revised his monthly budget in January 2019. He is taking responsible action to reduce 
his indebtedness and monthly expenses. Applicant’s debt arose under such 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur, and he is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
his outstanding student loans. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c), and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
7 
 
 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an individual 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust with the Government. The 
Government does not require Applicant to be debt-free, but he is required to manage 
his finances in such a way as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
Applicant is 56 years old and has worked for his present employer since 
September 2007. He has held a DOD security clearance since approximately 1997. He 
has taken responsible action to address his debts, which arose under circumstances 
beyond his control. Applicant’s conduct demonstrates his good judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concern arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
   
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
