1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---  ) ISCR Case No. 18-02123 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for 
a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On August 1, 2017, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on October 9, 
2018, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG), for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
1 Item 3 (SF 86, dated March 7, 2014). 
04/19/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and 
detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The DOD adjudicators 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 26, 2018. In a sworn statement prepared 
with the assistance of his attorney, dated November 12, 2018, Applicant responded to the 
SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on December 26, 2018. On January 
2, 2019, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Pre-hearing 
Guidance, and he was advised that his case would be scheduled for a hearing. On 
January 3, 2019, Applicant responded and indicated that he was currently deployed to 
Iraq; he was no longer represented by an attorney; and that he would not be available for 
a hearing until early 2020. Accordingly, he withdrew his request for a hearing and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He confirmed his 
request on January 14, 2019.  
 
A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on January 15, 2019, and he was afforded an opportunity, within 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM 
on February 12, 2019, signing receipts on that day and on February 18, 2019. A response 
was due by March 20, 2019. Applicant timely submitted a statement to the FORM which 
was marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE G), and it was added to the materials 
that had been attached to his Answer to the SOR, and marked and admitted as AE A 
through AE F. The case was initially assigned to another administrative judge on January 
11, 2019, but was reassigned to me on March 26, 2019. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Federal Republic of Iraq (Iraq), appearing in 11 U.S. 
Government publications that were published by the U.S. Department of State, the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, and the U.S. Director of National Intelligence, as well 
as two citations to public law, on the Internet, but no hard copy of any of those publications 
was furnished. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are easily verifiable 
by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case.  
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 201, 
Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,2 as set forth below 
under the Iraq subsection. 
                                                          
2 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, all but one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., and 1.e.). 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of defense contractor (A), serving as a linguist, 
currently deployed to Iraq until the end of 2019. He initially served as a linguist with the 
U.S. Army in Iraq, training at the Iraqi Police Academy through defense contractor (B) 
and other unidentified contractors with the U.S. Army in Iraq from July 2006 until 
December 2008. He subsequently joined defense contractor (B) again in the United 
States in July 2017, where he remained employed until sometime after he was 
interviewed by an investigator with the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 
late August 2017, at which time he joined defense contractor (A). All of Applicant’s formal 
education, including elementary, high school, and college, was received in Iraq. He 
received a bachelor’s degree in 1984. In 1985, during the Iran–Iraq War, Applicant was 
drafted into the Iraqi Army for the required compulsory military service. Although he was 
wounded in combat in 1987, he remained on active duty in a non-combat role until he 
was medically discharged as a 1st lieutenant in 1992. He has never served as a member 
of the U.S. military. He has never been granted a security clearance. 
 
As a linguist, in 2008, Applicant emigrated from Iraq to the United States under the 
Special Immigrant Visa for Iraqi Translators Program. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2014.3 In his e-QIP, Applicant stated that he had renounced his Iraqi citizenship:4 
                                                          
12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from government 
reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative information or sources 
from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing internet sources for numerous 
documents). In this instance, although Department Counsel has selected only certain facts appearing in 
the identified publications, I have not limited myself to only those facts, but have considered the publications 
in their entirety. 
 
3 The oath of citizenship is as follows: 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance 
and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty, of whom or which I have 
heretofore been a subject or citizen; that I will support and defend the Constitution and 
laws of the United States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arms on behalf of the United 
States when required by the law; that I will perform noncombatant service in the Armed 
Forces of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform work of national 
importance under civilian direction when required by the law; and that I take this obligation 
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me God. 
 
https://www.uscis.gov/us-citizenship/naturalization-test/naturalization-oath-allegiance-united-
states-america 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
 
I willingly renounce any and all allegiance to previous country of citizenship, 
surrender my active/expired passport(s) and pledge my loyalty exclusively 
to the United States of America. I take these actions to demonstrate my 
loyalty to the United States and my responsibility to protect sensitive 
information and those sensitive circumstances that I may encounter as I 
carry out my duties and responsibilities to the United States of America. 
 
Applicant was married in 1988. In 2009, Applicant’s wife and their children joined 
Applicant in the United States. He and his wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen, have three 
children: his oldest daughter, born in 1990, is in her second year of medical school at a 
U.S. university, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen; his son, born in 1991, graduated from a 
U.S. university with an engineering degree, and works for a municipal utility in the United 
States, and is a U.S. Green Card holder;5 and his youngest daughter graduates this year 
as a civil engineer and geologist from a U.S. university, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
 
Foreign Influence6 
 
As noted above, Applicant was born, raised, educated, and worked in Iraq. His 
father, now deceased, was an Iraqi-born clerk, and his mother, also deceased, was an 
Iraqi-born housewife. They had six children, including Applicant. Applicant’s three, as 
opposed to the alleged four, brothers are Iraqi-born citizens and residents. One brother 
is a self-employed steelworker; one is an accountant with the Iraqi Government; and the 
other is a retired enlisted man with the Iraq military. Applicant’s two sisters are also Iraqi-
born citizens and residents. One is a teacher and the other is a housewife. None of 
Applicant’s siblings was ever associated with the Iraqi intelligence service. As of August 
2017, Applicant’s contacts with his siblings varied. He generally spoke to his sisters by 
telephone on a monthly to quarterly basis. He last spoke to one brother in May 2018, but 
had not had any contact with his other two brothers in about a year. In early 2018, 
Applicant’s relationship with his brothers became strained following a falling out when 
they demanded Applicant’s financial support, something Applicant declined. As a result, 
he cut all ties with them.7 Two of Applicant’s brothers are married to Iraqi-born wives, both 
of whom are teachers. Applicant initially spoke with them when he spoke with his brothers, 
but communication with them now is much more limited. 
                                                          
4 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated August 1, 2017), at 8-9. 
 
5 A Green Card holder (permanent resident) is someone who has been granted authorization to 
live and work in the United States on a permanent basis. As proof of that status, U.S. Citizenship and 
Immigration Services (USCIS) grants a person a permanent resident card, commonly called a "Green 
Card." 
 
6 General source information pertaining to the foreign influence issues discussed below can be 
found in the following exhibits: Item 2, supra note 3; Item 3 (Enhanced Subject Interview, dated August 24, 
2017); Item 4 (Developed Relatives and Associates, dated August 7, 2017); Item 1 (Answer to the SOR, 
dated November 12, 2018); AE C (Statement, undated); AE E (Sales Contract, dated February 20, 2018); 
AE F (Typewritten format of Item 4).  
 
7 Response to the FORM, undated. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
After Applicant completed his military service, and started receiving a monthly 
military pension of approximately $320, he worked in a number of different entrepreneurial 
jobs ranging from driving a taxi, selling hand-woven rugs, to running a chicken farm. By 
the mid-1990s, he managed to save enough money to purchase a house in Iraq for 
approximately $4,000. After the United States invaded Iraq, his military-subsidized 
chicken-farm income plummeted with the collapse of the Iraqi Army, so Applicant 
searched for another job. He finally obtained a position as an interpreter for the U.S. 
military, initially out of desperation to make money despite the dangerous nature of the 
job. Because it was considered an extremely dangerous job, Applicant had to keep his 
job a secret from all but his closest family members. Applicant described his experience 
as follows:8  
 
. . . as I got to know the fine men and women of our military, it became a 
calling. I was inspired by their dedication for their country and their desire 
to do good. They served their country with honor and deserved all the 
admiration that I could give them. 
 
Upon immigrating to the United States, Applicant briefly resided first with a former 
U.S. colleague in Baghdad – and then with the family who had been sponsoring 
Applicant’s son as an exchange student. He went back to Iraq briefly in 2009, and 
returned to the United States with his wife and other children. He rented his house in Iraq 
to family members for $400 per month. He went through periods of unemployment in the 
United States, and he eventually became a taxi driver, before being able to, once again, 
become a linguist. The rental money and his military pension provided some continuing 
income for him that was sufficient for him to place a down payment for the family 
residence in the United States. Applicant sold his Iraqi house for approximately 
183,000,000 Iraqi Dinars in February 2018, and he used the funds to pay off his mortgage 
on his residence in the United States.9 When he severed all ties with his brothers, his 
military pension, which had been obtained on his behalf by one of his brothers, stopped 
being sent to him.10 Applicant no longer has any financial interests in, or coming from, 
Iraq.  
  
Applicant’s relationship with the United States was expressed, as follows:11 
 
The United States took me and my family in, gave us safety, opportunity, 
and the greatest honor of citizenship. I feel very proud every day as I look 
at my children and how their country gave them the opportunity to prosper. 
. . . Seeing them grow, prosper, and journey successfully towards their 
American dream make me proud to be an American. My allegiance for my 
country is paramount and unwavering. 
                                                          
8 AE C, supra note 6. 
 
9 AE E, supra note 6; Response to the FORM, supra note 7. 
 
10 Response to the FORM, supra note 7. 
 
11 AE C, supra note 6. 
 
6 
                                      
 
 
He subsequently added:12 
 
. . . . I would like to mention that I understand I left behind blood relatives in 
Iraq, however, the only people I care about are with me in [the United States] 
not in Iraq. When I took the citizenship oath, I swore an unwavering 
allegiance to the United States, and this will not change under any 
circumstances. 
 
Iraq 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. The outcome of the 2014 
parliamentary elections generally met international standards of free and fair elections 
and led to the peaceful transition of power from former Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki to 
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. 
 
In August 1990, Iraq invaded neighboring Kuwait and declared its annexation into 
Iraq. Despite United Nations (UN) disapproval of the action, Iraq refused to withdraw from 
Kuwait. In January 1991, a coalition of nations, led by the United States, launched military 
operations against Iraq, called Operation Desert Storm. The Iraqi Army was crushed. No-
fly zones were established in Iraq, banning Iraq from using all aircraft in the designated 
no-fly zones. After several years of Iraqi non-compliance with established UN resolutions 
and requirements, in March 2003, the United States and another coalition of nations 
launched another assault on Iraq, called Operation Iraqi Freedom. Some military 
operations ceased in May 2003, and a provisional government under a governing council 
and an American Chief Civilian Administrator was established to decide all Iraqi affairs. 
Over the ensuing years, hostilities and terrorism continued, and U.S. military operations 
increased. In 2003, outlawed mid-level and lower level officials of the Ba’ath Party were 
permitted to return to their previous posts. By late 2010, over 90,000 U.S. troops were 
withdrawn from Iraq, leaving only a transitional military force to advise and assist security 
forces, counterterrorism missions, and protect U.S. civilians. 
 
The U.S. Mission in Iraq remains dedicated to building a strategic partnership with 
Iraq and the Iraqi people. The December 2011 departure of U.S. troops from Iraq marked 
a milestone in our relationship as Iraq continues to develop as a sovereign, stable, and 
self-reliant country. Iraq is now a key partner for the U.S. in the region as well as a voice 
of moderation and democracy in the Middle East. Iraq has functioning government 
institutions including an active legislature, is playing an increasingly constructive role in 
the region, and has a bright economic future as oil revenues surpass pre-Saddam 
production levels with continued rapid growth to come. The U.S. maintains vigorous and 
broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, and security issues in 
accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA). 
  
                                                          
 
12 Response to the FORM, supra note 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The SFA between Iraq and the U.S. provides the basis for the U.S.-Iraq bilateral 
relationship. It covers the range of bilateral issues including political relations and 
diplomacy, defense and security, trade and finance, energy, judicial and law enforcement 
issues, services, science, culture, education, and environment. Efforts to implement the 
SFA are overseen by the Higher Coordinating Committee and several Joint Coordination 
Committees, which meet periodically.  
 
The U.S. State Department warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk for 
violence and kidnapping, and advises U.S. citizens not to travel to Iraq. The current travel 
advisory level is Level 4: “Do not travel to Iraq due to terrorism and armed conflict.” The 
U.S. Government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. Government 
personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work under strict 
security guidelines.  
 
The ability of the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens 
outside Baghdad is limited given the security environment. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. Kidnappings and 
attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED) occur in many areas of the country, 
including Baghdad. Methods of attack have included explosively formed penetrators 
(EFPs), magnetic IEDs placed on vehicles, human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines placed 
on or concealed near roads, mortars and rockets, and shootings using various direct fire 
weapons. Such attacks may take place in public venues such as cafes and markets. 
  
Iraq witnessed continued terrorist activity in 2016, primarily as a result of the 
actions of Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIL). In 2016, ISIL remained the greatest 
terrorist threat globally, maintaining a formidable force in Syria, including a large number 
of foreign terrorist fighters. ISIL’s capacity and territorial control in Iraq has dramatically 
eroded in the past two years. According to estimates from the UN Assistance Mission for 
Iraq, acts of terrorism and violence killed more than 7,000 civilians and injured more than 
12,000 in 2016. By the end of 2017, Iraqi Security Forces had liberated all territory from 
ISIL, drastically reducing ISIL’s ability to commit abuses and atrocities. Nevertheless, anti-
American/anti-western sentiment exists throughout Iraq. Human rights violations continue 
to be a problem with allegations of unlawful killings and other abuses being made against 
the Iraqi Security Forces and Popular Mobilization Forces. 
  
In its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State reported that 
severe human rights problems were widespread. Sectarian hostility, widespread 
corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of government and society weakened 
the government's authority and worsened effective human rights protections. Iraqi 
Security Forces, members of the Federal Police, and the Peshmerga committed some 
human rights violations, and there continued to be reports of Popular Mobilization Forces 
killing, torturing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. ISIL committed the overwhelming 
majority of serious human rights abuses, including attacks against: civilians, (particularly 
Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL); members of other religious and ethnic minorities; 
women; and children.  
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Observers also reported other significant human rights-related problems: harsh 
and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities; arbitrary arrest and 
lengthy pretrial detention, denial of fair public trial; insufficient judicial institutional 
capacity; ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; arbitrary 
interference with privacy and homes; child soldiers; limits on freedom of expression, 
including press freedoms; violence against and harassment of journalists; undue 
censorship; social, religious, and political restrictions in academic and cultural matters; 
limits on freedoms of peaceful assembly and association; limits on religious freedom due 
to violence by extremist groups; restrictions on freedom of movement; refugee and 
internally displaced persons (IDP) abuse; both forced IDP returns and preventing IDPs 
from returning home; discrimination against and societal abuse of women and ethnic, 
religious, and racial minorities, including exclusion from decision-making roles; trafficking 
in persons; societal discrimination and violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) persons; seizure of property without due process; and 
limitations on worker rights. 
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Iraq is balanced against the 
inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Iraq to its citizens and residents and Iraq 
government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. A top national 
security goal of the United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, training, and 
support of the Iraq Government and military in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
While most of the official U.S. commentary regarding Iraq focuses on human rights 
violations and terrorist activities, there is little, if any, evidence that Iraq is an active 
participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or violator 
of export-control regulations. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”13 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”14   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
13 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
14 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
9 
                                      
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”15 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.16  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”17 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”18 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
                                                          
15 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
18 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 
7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
The SOR focused on Applicant’s five siblings, and their Iraqi citizenship and 
residence; two sisters-in-law, and their Iraqi citizenship and residence; his home 
ownership in Iraq with an approximate value of $130,000; and his monthly $320 Iraqi 
military pension. Before 2018, Applicant was bound to his family in Iraq by mutual 
affection. In addition to the citizenship and residence issues, the property owned in Iraq, 
and the military pension, other facts of particular note in the Government’s argument in 
 
11 
                                      
 
the FORM are generally as follows: the frequency of contacts that Applicant has with his 
siblings and sisters-in-law; the presence of Islamist radical groups in Iraq; the increased 
levels of terrorism, violence, and insurgency in Iraq; significant human rights problems in 
Iraq; and the current U.S. Department of State travel advisory level stating: “Do not travel 
to Iraq due to terrorism and armed conflict.” All of these facts concerning country 
conditions in Iraq demonstrate a potentially heightened risk of exploitation, coercion or 
duress are present due to Applicant’s close ties to family members who reside in Iraq.  
 
When an allegation under a disqualifying condition is established, “the Directive 
presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or 
circumstances . . . and an applicant’s security eligibility. Direct or objective evidence of 
nexus is not required.”19  
 
There are safety issues for residents of Iraq primarily because of terrorists and 
anti-U.S. sectarian militias operating in Iraq. The mere possession of close family ties with 
relatives or in-laws living in Iraq is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under the foreign 
influence guideline. However, if an applicant has such a relationship with even one person 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of sensitive information.20 These 
types of relationships could create a “heightened risk” of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Furthermore, as a matter of common sense and 
human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection 
for, or obligation to, their immediate family members, and this presumption includes in-
laws.21 Because of the SOR allegation associated with Applicant’s two sisters-in-law, the 
in-law presumption concerning foreign influence is relevant here.  
  
The DOHA Appeal Board has indicated for foreign influence cases, “the nature of 
the foreign government involved and the intelligence-gathering history of that government 
are among the important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence 
and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case. The 
country’s human rights record is another important consideration.”22 Another important 
consideration is the nature of a nation’s government’s relationship with the United States. 
These factors are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
living in that country are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement.  
 
                                                          
19 See Case No. 17-00507 at 2 (App. Bd. June 13, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 
(App. Bd. May 23, 2018)). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009); ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
21 See ISCR Case No. 17-03450 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2019); ISCR Case No. 09-06831 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Mar. 8, 2011); ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 05-00939 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 16-02435 at 3 (May 15, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Mar. 13, 2017)). 
 
12 
                                      
 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law including 
widely accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a 
substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship of Iraq with 
the United States, and the situation in Iraq places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with any family member living in Iraq does 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a relative 
living in Iraq.  
 
Foreign influence security concerns are not limited to countries hostile to the 
United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States.”23 Friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security, and we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical 
fields.24  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists from 
Iraq seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or 
his family, it would not be wise to rule out such a possibility in the future. International 
terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable state 
intelligence services, and Iraq, like many countries, has a problem with terrorism. 
Applicant’s family in Iraq “could be a means through which Applicant comes to the 
attention of those who seek U.S. information or technology and who would attempt to 
exert coercion upon him.”25 Nevertheless, as noted above, because of the citizenship and 
residence issues of his family members; the property owned in Iraq; his military pension; 
and the other facts of particular note in the Government’s argument, the issues of potential 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation have been raised, and AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
apply. Inasmuch as the property in Iraq has been sold, and he is no longer receiving his 
military pension, AG ¶ 7(f) minimally applies. However, further inquiry is necessary to 
determine the degree of “heightened risk” as well as the application of any mitigating 
conditions. 
                                                          
23 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
24 See ISCR Case No. 02-22461, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 1570 at *11-*12 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-26976 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2004)). 
 
25 ISCR Case No. 14-02950 at 3 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence under AG ¶ 8: 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
As noted above, since October 2001, when U.S. forces and coalition partners led 
military operations in Afghanistan, there has been first an interim government, essentially 
under U.S. control by the Chief Civilian Administrator and a governing council, and then 
a democratic government in Iraq. Nevertheless, many daunting challenges remained 
largely because of Islamic terrorists and unfriendly forces continue to assert power and 
intimidation within the country. It is less likely that the Iraqi government would attempt 
coercive means to obtain sensitive information. The real concern in this instance is not 
the Iraqi government, but rather the Islamic terrorists and anti-U.S. sectarian militias.  
 
Department Counsel argued that the presence of Islamist radical groups; the 
increased levels of terrorism, violence, and insurgency; and human rights problems in 
Iraq demonstrate that a heightened risk of exploitation, coercion or duress are present 
due to Applicant’s close ties to his siblings and in-laws. Based on their various 
relationships, and the locations of Applicant’s siblings and in-laws, there is obviously a 
potential, if not substantial, risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security 
clearance.  
 
However, that risk is not generated by the Iraqi government, but rather by Islamic 
terrorists striking out against the central Iraq authorities and all foreigners. Applicant’s 
siblings and in-laws are not unlike members of the U.S. military stationed in Iraq, for they, 
too, are potential targets in this war on civilized humanity. The presence of Islamist radical 
groups and increased levels of terrorism, violence, and insurgency in Iraq have also been 
 
14 
                                      
 
described for events occurring on September 11, 2001, and more recently in Fort Hood, 
Boston, Paris, Nice, Orlando, San Bernardino, and New York City.  
 
There are U.S. military forces stationed in Iraq, and Applicant’s continued presence 
there as a linguist assisting the U.S. forces, while faced with the high-risk dangers 
involved there, would be of significant assistance to those U.S. forces in fulfilling their 
mission.26 Such evidence clearly demonstrates that Applicant has repeatedly been willing 
to assume a high level of personal risk on behalf of the United States and shows his ties 
and sense of obligation to the United States could be sufficiently strong enough to support 
a favorable application of mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b).27 
   
As far as Applicant’s siblings and in-laws are concerned, their relationships have 
substantially soured over time. As recently as August 2017, Applicant’s contacts with his 
siblings were that he generally spoke to his sisters by telephone on a monthly to quarterly 
basis; he last spoke to one brother in May 2018; and had not had any contact with his 
other two brothers in about a year. In early 2018, Applicant’s relationship with his brothers 
became strained following a falling out over financial support. As a result, he cut all ties 
with them. Two of Applicant’s brothers are married to Iraqi-born wives, both of whom are 
teachers. Applicant initially spoke with them when he spoke with his brothers, but 
communication with them now is much more limited. Applicant clearly acknowledged: “I 
understand I left behind blood relatives in Iraq, however, the only people I care about are 
with me in [the United States] not in Iraq. . . . I swore an unwavering allegiance to the 
United States, and this will not change under any circumstances.”  
 
Furthermore, there is no evidence that Applicant’s siblings and in-laws are or have 
ever been political activists, challenging the policies of the Iraqi government; that terrorists 
have approached or threatened them for any reason; that the Iraqi government or any 
terrorist organization have approached them; or that they currently engage in activities 
                                                          
26 ISCR Case No. 17-00629 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018) the Appeal Board discussed a translator’s 
multiple tours on behalf of the United States in Iraq, limited time as a resident in the United States, and 
connections to family living in Iraq. The Appeal Board stated: 
  
In general, an applicant’s deployment to a combat zone in support of U.S. forces is not a 
factor that weighs against his or her national security eligibility. On the contrary, such 
deployments tend to establish various mitigating conditions such as [Directive] ¶ 8(b) 
(“there is no conflict of interest . . . because . . . the individual has such deep and 
longstanding loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest”); [Directive] ¶ 8(d) (“the foreign . . . 
activities are on U.S. Government business”); and [Directive] ¶ 8(f) (“the value or routine 
nature of the foreign business . . . is such that [it is] unlikely to result in a conflict of interest 
and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.”)  
 
Id. at 3 (internal footnotes omitted) (remanding administrative judge’s denial of security clearance). 
 
27 ISCR Case No. 17-00629 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018); ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 
14, 2006) (An applicant’s work in support of U.S. forces in Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous 
high-risk circumstances in which [he] made a significant contribution to national security.”) See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2-3 (App. Bd.Feb.5, 2008); 
and ISCR Case No. 10-02803 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
that would bring attention to themselves. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they 
would be targets for coercion or exploitation by the Iraqi government or the terrorists, 
which may seek to quiet those who speak out against them. Under these circumstances, 
the potential heightened risk created by their residence in Iraq is greatly diminished. 
Under the developed evidence, it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States. 
 
Applicant has substantial connections to the United States, having lived in the 
United States for over a decade. His wife and two of his children are naturalized U.S. 
citizens residing in the United States. Two of the three children have university degrees, 
with one of them in her second year of medical school, His third child is in her final 
semester of a U.S. university. He owns a residence in the United States.  
 
Applicant no longer owns a residence in Iraq, having sold it in 2018 after it had 
been for sale for some time. Furthermore, since his falling out with his brothers, he no 
longer receives the Iraqi military pension. But, even if he were still receiving that pension, 
it is  highly unlikely that $320 a month would result in a conflict that could be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure him. Applicant has met his burden of 
showing there is little likelihood that relationships with his siblings and in-laws could create 
a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Furthermore, considering what he previously 
said about the United States (“Seeing [his children] grow, prosper, and journey 
successfully towards their American dream make me proud to be an American. My 
allegiance for my country is paramount and unwavering;” and “When I took the citizenship 
oath, I swore an unwavering allegiance to the United States, and this will not change 
under any circumstances.”); as well as his professional activities as a linguist for U.S. 
forces in Iraq, I am persuaded that Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is steadfast 
and undivided, and that he has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the U.S., that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(f) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.28       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his three 
brothers, two sisters, and two sisters-in-law are Iraqi citizen-residents, they are at risk from 
Islamic terrorists and anti-U.S. sectarian militias operating in Iraq. The Iraqi government 
does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. A 
former 1st Lieutenant in the Iraqi Army, he was medically discharged, and he received a 
monthly military pension of $320.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as a linguist 
with U.S. forces in Iraq, where he is scheduled to remain until the end of 2019. He 
previously served in the same capacity during a period of increased hostilities and military 
action, and he contributed to the missions of the United States at personal risk on behalf 
of U.S. combat forces in Iraq. The United States and Iraqi governments are allies in the war 
on terrorism. Applicant has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. 
His past and current honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards mitigating the 
foreign influence security concerns. These circumstances increase the probability that 
Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist 
group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him.29 Furthermore, he is no longer close 
to his family members who reside in Iraq; he no longer owns a house in Iraq; and he no 
longer receives his military pension.  
 
Moreover, while the “heightened risk” of terrorist activities occurring in Iraq are also 
active in the United States, creating a “heightened risk” here as well. With his wife and 
children residing in the United States, there is a reduced “heightened risk” of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Under the evidence 
presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e.:  For Applicant 
     
                                                          
28 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
29 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
17 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
