1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01634 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
______________ 
04/19/2019
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, 
Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 3, 2016. On 
August 24, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, criminal conduct, Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR with a detailed three-page answer, admitting 
all of the SOR allegations except SOR ¶ 1.b. He provided explanations for each of the 
incidents that he admitted. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2019. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for February 28, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through J, which were admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received at 
DOHA on March 11, 2019. I left the record open until March 8, 2019, and Applicant 
provided an additional character reference letter from a life-long friend, attesting to 
Applicant’s honesty. (AE K) 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He graduated from high school in 1978 and obtained 
his associate’s degree in aeronautics in 1983. Applicant has been employed in the 
aviation field in some capacity since age 12. (Tr. 42) He reports no military service. He 
married in 1990 and divorced in 1998 with no children. Applicant taught himself 
computer coding and he started software companies in the 1980s. (Tr. 45) His company 
employed 85 people and had $45 million in annual sales when Applicant was age 29. 
(Tr. 48) Applicant moved south to a different state in 2016 to get away from a gritty and 
deleterious lifestyle and start a job with a major federal contractor. (Tr. 91) 
 
 Applicant admits he was arrested in February 2008 and charged with 
possession of a controlled substance, and driving while impaired. (Answer) Applicant 
testified that he sustained a devastating leg injury in 2003 and he was unable to work 
through 2008. (Tr. 51, 53, 56, AE E, H) He had invested his life savings in his small 
business. Since he had no insurance, he lost everything. (Answer) He was attempting to 
rebuild his business and facilitate investors, when he went out with an associate who 
used drugs. (Tr. 57-58) They had a beer together and then the associate drove them to 
a house party where the associate and others used cocaine. Applicant testified credibly 
he did not use cocaine that evening; although he did use it previously following his 
injury. (Tr. 67)  He wanted to leave the party. (Tr. 58)  His associate said “take my keys” 
and Applicant drove away. He was stopped by police and admitted to having a beer. 
The vehicle owner’s girlfriend left her coat in the back seat. When Applicant authorized 
a search of the vehicle, police found cocaine and drug paraphernalia in the coat. He 
was arrested. He no longer associates with the vehicle owner or the coat owner.  
 
Although the driving while impaired charge was dismissed, Applicant was 
convicted of possession of a controlled substance (found in the female’s coat) and 
sentenced to three years’ probation, court costs, and a fine. (Tr. 64-66) In section 22 
(Police Record) of his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86) or security 
clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that he served four months in jail in 
July 2011 for a probation violation. He testified credibly that he was at the end of his 
court-ordered probation for the July 2008 conviction above, when he informed his 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 3, 2016 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 1), or his personal subject interview (PSI) on October 4, 2017. (Item 2)  
 
 
3 
 
 
probation officer that he needed to travel to an upstate location. (Tr. 69) She responded 
that he should just check in with her when he returned. (Tr. 71) When Applicant spent 
more time upstate than he intended, he realized he was going to be late returning. (Tr. 
72) He called to advise the probation officer of this delay. She nonetheless reported the 
tardiness violation by Applicant, causing him to have to serve out his sentence in jail. 
(Tr. 73-74) His mother died while he was in jail. (Tr. 77)  
 
Applicant admits that he was stopped by police in July 2008 and charged with 
unlicensed operation of a vehicle, running a red light, and driving an unregistered 
vehicle. SOR ¶ 1.b was amended at the outset of the hearing to reflect that he was 
“stopped” by police and not “arrested.” (Tr. 11-12) Applicant admits to the allegation as 
amended. He received a citation and failed to appear in court. He has paid all fees and 
fines associated with that traffic stop, and the warrant that issued (for failure to appear) 
has been rescinded in September 2018. (Tr. 85, AE A, F) Applicant states that 2008 
was a bad year and he struggled with depression as a result of his crippling injury and 
loss of his business. (Tr. 15, 67) He later treated with a clinical master social worker in 
2016. (Tr. 91-92)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was also arrested for driving while impaired 
(DWI) in March 1999. (SOR ¶ 1.d) He admits to this offense twenty years ago, and he 
pled guilty and paid all fines and court costs associated with it. (Tr. 53-55) He also 
admits that he was arrested in April 2017 for DWI as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant 
testified that he was very ill and suffering from bronchitis and allergies at the time. (Tr. 
98)  He was prescribed medication by his physician, and he took a steroid, antibiotic, 
and cough medicine, prior to the arrest. (Tr. 103, 124) He was pulled over by police who 
said Applicant had swerved erratically while driving to a convenience mart at 2:00 a.m. 
to get throat lozenges. (Tr. 102) Applicant testified he was having a coughing fit. When 
he was pulled over, he was unsteady on his feet due to the devastating injury. (Tr. 102) 
He took a breathalyzer that registered zero blood-alcohol content. (Tr. 104) He was 
found guilty of failure to use due care while driving since he was operating under the 
influence of cough medicine. (Tr. 105, GE 4, AE D) Applicant paid a $1,500 dollar fine. 
(Tr. 107)  
 
 Applicant last used illegal drugs in 2008. (Tr. 114) He drinks only on rare 
occasions. (Tr. 116) Applicant presented testimony from his supervisor of the fleet 
ballistic missile section of a federal contractor. (Tr. 30) He spoke to Applicant’s superb 
work ethic and character, and testified that Applicant is honest, trustworthy, and reliable. 
(Tr. 34-36) The witness wrote Applicant’s excellent performance evaluation. (AE J) 
Applicant also provided a favorable character reference letter and a letter from his 
previous attorney attesting to the fact that he resolved all outstanding traffic violations in 
state A and all fines were paid in 2015. (AE C, G) Applicant admitted the cross-alleged 
violations under Guidelines E and G, at SOR ¶¶ 2 and 3, and provides the same 
explanations as above.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 
5 
 
 
31(a) a pattern of minor offenses; any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness;   
 
31(b) evidence, (including but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
31(d) violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-ordered rehabilitation program.   
.  
 Applicant has admitted to his arrests for DWI in 1999 (convicted); possession of 
a controlled substance found in a female’s coat in 2008 (convicted); failure to exercise 
due  care (reduced from DWI) in 2017 (for driving while coughing); a tardiness probation 
violation, and a failure to appear in court as a result of his 2008 arrest. He also had a 
series of traffic violations when he was down on his luck around 2008. His admissions 
are corroborated by the record evidence including the FBI criminal history and court 
documents introduced by Department Counsel. AG ¶¶ 31(a), (b), and (d) have been 
established by the Government’s evidence. The above disqualifying conditions are 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
          Applicant has only one conviction for DWI that occurred over twenty years ago.  
His last arrest for failure to exercise due care (driving while coughing and taking cough 
medicine) was not an alcohol-related event. He paid a $1,500 fine for this conviction. 
The 2008 arrest for possession, and attendant traffic offenses, all occurred when 
Applicant was suffering from depression as the result of loss of his life savings in his 
small business, and loss of his health. Applicant was forthright and candid that his 
choice of prospective business associates at that time showed a lack of judgment. 
However, I accept his testimony that the cocaine and paraphernalia found in the 
female’s coat were not his. These offenses occurred 11 years ago, and he has since 
 
6 
 
 
treated with a master clinical social worker and turned his life around. While it is 
inexplicable why he failed to appear in court after the July 2008 traffic stop, it is clear 
that he has since paid all associated costs, fines and fees to state A. Although his 
conduct in 2008 reflects a careless disregard for laws and rules of the road, Applicant 
convinced me that it was a fleeting and uncharacteristic period in his life. He has 
overcome a catastrophic injury, loss of his mother while in jail, and loss of a lucrative 
business. It is not likely that his misconduct will recur and I am confident he will follow 
rules and regulations with respect to handling classified information. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
(d) apply.   
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
 Applicant had only one alcohol-related incident, the DWI arrest in 1999. SOR AG 
¶¶ 22(a) is applicable, even though the incident is very dated.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
My analyses above under Guideline J is the same under this administrative 
Guideline G, and are herein incorporated by reference. Applicant has never been 
 
7 
 
 
diagnosed with an alcohol use disorder. There is no evidence that he is alcohol 
dependent or abuses alcohol. He completed court-ordered probation and all conditions 
ordered in 2008, although he had one hiccup when he violated his conditions by his 
tardiness in checking in with his probation officer in 2011. He voluntarily attended 
counseling with a master clinical social worker in 2016. He only drinks on rare 
occasions, and never to excess. Applicant provided assurance that he has modified his 
drinking and that he uses alcohol moderately. AG ¶¶ 32 (a) and (b) apply to mitigate the 
cross-alleged allegations at SOR ¶¶ 2.a.  
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a pattern of rules violations and traffic offenses that 
may indicate an inability or unwillingness to modify his behavior and comply with laws 
and rules of the road for safe driving. AG ¶¶ 16(c) is implicated.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could potent ia l l y  mitigate security concerns 
include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
 
8 
 
 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
My analyses above under Guidelines J and G are the same under this this 
Guideline E, and are herein incorporated by reference. Applicant has completed 
counseling, moved away from his external stressors, and modified his lifestyle. AG ¶¶ 
17(c) and (d) apply. They are enough to overcome Applicant’s established pattern of 
violating the law and rules. Most of his illegal conduct and driving offenses occurred 
during a period of enormous stress in Applicant’s life and may be considered minor 
under the circumstances. They do not present a pattern of bad judgment. Applicant has 
produced documentation, witness testimony, and his own testimony, showing that he 
has overcome any putative drinking problem and modified his consumption. He has not 
used drugs since 2008 and he has an engaging and rewarding career opportunity.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has addressed 
the specific allegations in the SOR. He has overcome adversity and desires to serve the 
defense industry as a contractor. He has offered sufficient evidence to assure the 
Government that there will be no recurrence. He has met his burden of production.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
9 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:              For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                                  For Applicant 
 
            Paragraph 3, Guideline G:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:                                   For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                               
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
