KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
She states, however, that “decisions . . . can be made other than canceling my clearance.”  To the
extent she is arguing that an exception under Directive, Encl. 2, App. C should be granted, she
has not shown that such an exception is merited.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-01240.a1
DATE: 04/30/2019
DATE: April 30, 2019
In Re:
---------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-01240
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
30, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On February 19, 2019, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  She
states, however, that “decisions . . . can be made other than canceling my clearance.”  Appeal Brief
at 1.  To the extent she is arguing that an exception under Directive, Encl. 2, App. C should be
granted, she has not shown that such an exception is merited.  
  
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale          
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
