 
 
 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01635 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Marcus Brown, Personal Representative
04/18/2019 
Decision
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case
On June 25, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 
(AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 10, 2018, and she requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on February 28, 2019, and the hearing was convened as
scheduled on March 19, 2019. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
    
  
  
 
                                                          
  
 
  
 
 
 
identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered one exhibit (AE A), 
which was admitted without objection. The record remained open until March 29, 2019, 
to allow Applicant to submit documentary evidence. She submitted AE B through E,
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 5, 2019. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted six SOR allegations and denied the remaining three. Her 
admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings
and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
this contractor for approximately 14 years. She served honorably in the U.S. Army and
retired in 1997 after 20 years in the grade of sergeant first class (E-7). She has held a 
security clearance for over 40 years. She has a high school diploma and has taken 
some college courses. She is currently married. She has been married four times 
previously. She has two adult children.1 
The SOR alleged Applicant had a foreclosed mortgage account; a past-due 
account in the amount of approximately $31,890; five charged-off or collection accounts 
totaling approximately $4,269; and two delinquent medical accounts totaling $104. The 
debts were listed in a credit report from January 2017. Credit reports from August 2018 
and March 2019 show no delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.i).2 
Applicant credibly explained that her financial problems occurred during the 2008 
to 2011 timeframe when she was married to her fourth husband (H4). Applicant’s job 
required frequent lengthy travel away from home. When she was away during her 
marriage to H4, he told her he was paying the mortgage payment for their home, which 
at some point became rental property. They initially used a realtor to lease and manage 
this property. H4 neglected to tell Applicant that he fired the realtor and began 
managing the rental property himself. He neglected to pay the mortgage payments on 
the property and failed to supervise the tenants who severely damaged the property.
Eventually, the property went through foreclosure. Applicant was unaware the property 
was in jeopardy until the foreclosure proceedings. The property had a second mortgage, 
which also became delinquent while H4 was managing the property. Neither mortgage
holder has sought a deficiency judgment against Applicant since the foreclosure in
2010. Applicant sought and was granted a divorce against H4 in 2011. There is no 
evidence showing that she had any financial difficulties before she married or after she 
divorced H4. Applicant recently purchased a home and is current on her monthly
payments.3 
1 Tr. at 16-18, 21-22, 29; GE 1, 2.
2 GE 3-5.
3 Tr. at 18, 20-21, 23-26; GE 4-5. 
2
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
 
  
   
    
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
                                                          
 
 
 
 
Applicant documented that she paid the SOR debts listed in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 
1.f in July 2018. Those debts are resolved. She also documented her dispute of  SOR  
debts ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h by showing that she was covered by medical insurance and would 
not have incurred those debts. As for SOR debt ¶ 1.d, Applicant credibly stated that she 
contacted the creditor and they could not find that she owed on a debt.  This is  
confirmed by the absence of any debt listing on the latest two credit reports. Those 
debts are resolved.4 
In addition to her credit reports showing no delinquent debts and her recent
home purchase, Applicant also has a retirement account valued at approximately
$100,000. This supports her testimony that she is in good financial standing.5 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary  
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
4 Tr. at 18-19, 27-28; GE 4-5; AE A-B, D-E. 
5 Tr. at 29. 
3
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also  be  
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply:
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
The evidence showed Applicant accrued several delinquent collection debts and 
a mortgage foreclosure. I find the above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
4
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Although Applicant should have responded in a more timely fashion, she has
resolved her debts, outside of the mortgage foreclosure. The foreclosure was somewhat
beyond her control because H4 had assumed responsibility for overseeing the property 
while she was working remotely. He failed in this responsibility and she suffered the 
consequences. However, these debts no longer appear on her credit report. She 
successfully disputed the two medical debts by showing her insurance entitlement. The 
remaining debt was not found by the creditor. There are clear indications that her 
financial issues are resolved and that recurrence is unlikely. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) –
20(e) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to  
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
5
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
I considered Applicant’s military service, her federal contractor service, and the 
circumstances surrounding her indebtedness. I am convinced that Applicant will not 
incur delinquent debts in the future. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.   
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs: 1.a - 1.i: For Applicant 
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Robert E. Coacher
Administrative Judge 
6
