 
 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
______________ 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-02176 
)
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
04/18/2019 
Decision
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case
On October 24, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017 (AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2018. She elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 10, 2019. The evidence 
1
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
                                                          
 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-11 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on January
15, 2019. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government’s evidence. She submitted a series of documents, which were admitted 
collectively as exhibit (AE) A. Items 3-11 are also admitted without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on March 28, 2019.  
Findings of Fact 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR with explanations, except ¶ 1.i, 
which she denied. Her admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review 
of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
Applicant is 63 years old. She is a retired federal employee currently seeking a 
position with a federal contractor. She is single, twice divorced, with three adult children.
She achieved her GED in 1985 and has taken some college courses.1 
The SOR alleged Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1991 (discharged); 
Chapter 7 in 2002 (discharged); Chapter 13 in 2009 (dismissed); Chapter 7 in 2012 
(discharged); and Chapter 13 in 2014 (dismissed) (¶¶ 1.a-1.e). The SOR also alleged 
she was delinquent on her federal income taxes in the amount of $18,717 for years  
2010 and 2014-2016, and state income taxes in the amount of $4,754 (¶¶ 1.f-1.g). It
further alleged she owed on six delinquent collection accounts in the total amount of 
approximately $18,868. These accounts are comprised of a medical bill, utility debt, an 
apartment debt, a repossessed car debt, and consumer debt. The allegations are
supported by credit reports from April 2018 and October 2018, Applicant’s statement to 
a defense investigator in May 2018, various bankruptcy filings, and Applicant’s SOR 
admissions.2 
Applicant claimed financial hardship when she retired from her government 
position in 2017 and had to wait several months before she began receiving retired pay.
She documented this delay. There is no evidence of financial counseling.3 
Bankruptcies. Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcies and was discharged from 
her debts in 1991, 2002, and 2013 as a result of those proceedings. In 2009 and 2014 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions. Both those actions were dismissed.
There is no information as to the reason the 2009 petition was dismissed, but the 2014 
petition was dismissed in 2017 for failure to make three months of payments under the 
bankruptcy plan. While Applicant was a federal employee she had $197.50 deducted 
1 Items 3-4. 
2 Items 2, 4-11. 
3 AE A. 
2
 
 
 
 
  
  
    
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
                                                          
 
  
 
  
 
from her paycheck twice a month. From September 2014 until March 2017 she paid 
approximately $13,000 in plan payments before her petition was dismissed.4 
Taxes. Applicant claims she entered into a payment agreement with the IRS to
pay her federal tax debt. As proof of this agreement, she supplied a notice letter from 
the IRS dated April 18, 2018. The notice indicated that she owed $18,717; that her last 
payment was $0; and that next payment of $242 was due on May 1, 2018. Applicant
failed to provide documentation showing that she has made any payments to the IRS
starting in May 2018. As for her state taxes, she provided an installment bill from her 
taxing authority dated July 30, 2018, which indicated that she had a remaining balance
of $4,754 and her monthly payment of $96 was due on August 15, 2018. She failed to 
provide documentation showing that she made her monthly payments beginning in 
August 2018.5 
Collection Accounts. SOR ¶ 1.h: In February 2019, the creditor offered to settle 
this debt with Applicant for approximately $1,600 with monthly payments of $75. 
Applicant failed to document that she accepted the offer or made any payments. SOR ¶ 
1.i: Applicant disputes this utility debt. She claims she was serviced by another
company at the time of this alleged debt. She formally disputed this debt through a 
credit reporting service. SOR ¶ 1.j: Applicant documented that this medical debt was 
paid in August 2016. SOR ¶ 1.k: Applicant claims this debt was included in her 2014 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy and she was making her required payments until the case was 
dismissed. She did not provide documentation showing any payments since the  
Chapter 13 dismissal. SOR ¶ 1.l: Applicant claims her payment on this debt was 
affected by not timely receiving her retirement payments. She claims she will make $20 
monthly payments on this account, but she failed to document any payments so far. 
SOR ¶ 1.m: Applicant claims her payment on this debt was affected by not timely 
receiving her retirement payments. She claims she will make $10 monthly payments on 
this account, but she failed to document any payments so far.6 
Character Evidence. Applicant presented statements from seven co-workers 
and colleagues. In her former government position, she occupied a position of trust as a 
pretrial services officer. Her co-workers recognized her as a professional and 
trustworthy employee. They noted her dedication to her job and her great integrity.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
4 Items 7-11; AE A. 
5 Item 4; AE A.
6 Item 2; AE A.
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary  
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also  be  
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required. 
Applicant’s multiple bankruptcy filings over the years demonstrate her inability 
and unwillingness to pay her debts. She has federal and state tax debt, and other 
delinquent debts that remain unpaid. I find all the above disqualifying conditions are
raised. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
None of these mitigating conditions fully apply. Except for two debts, Applicant’s
debts are recent and remain unresolved. She has filed five bankruptcy petitions since 
1991, with the most recent in 2014. Her federal and state income tax debt remains 
unresolved. She did not provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems
are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s delayed receipt of her
monthly retirement pay may be considered a condition beyond her control, however, 
she failed to take responsible actions to address her tax and other debts. I find AG ¶
20(b) partially applies. Except for one debt, Applicant also failed to address her SOR 
debts through payments or establishing payment plans. There is no evidence of 
financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Aside from one debt (SOR ¶ 
1.i), Applicant failed to document any disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies.
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to  
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
6
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
 
                                                          
   
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s previous 
federal employment and the recommendation of her co-workers and colleagues. 
However, Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F,
financial considerations.7 
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h: 
Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j: 
Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m: 
   Against  Applicant  
   For  Applicant  
   Against  Applicant  
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Robert E. Coacher
Administrative Judge 
7 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.
7
