1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-00235 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Kelly Folks, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 For Applicant: Pro se 
04/25/2019
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On February 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct).1 On March 5, 2018, she addressed all allegations and requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. 
The SOR was amended on April 10, 2018, and a response was timely filed. I was 
assigned the case on September 12, 2018.  
A notice of hearing was issued on October 17, 2018, setting the hearing for 
December 6, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
15 exhibits (Exs.), noted as Exs. 1-15. Applicant gave testimony and introduced one 
witness. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 13, 2018. Based on the 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
testimony, materials, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate security 
concerns under either guideline alleged. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 71-year-old administrative assistant. She has worked on various 
government contracts for over 25 years. She was first awarded a secret clearance in 
2008. Applicant was unemployed for about a month in 2007. (Tr. 25) Once earning 
about $60,000 a year, she now only earns about $32,000 under her present contract. 
Applicant is a high school graduate who has completed some business school courses. 
She has two middle-aged children and her spouse is deceased. At issue is 
approximately $37,000 in delinquent debts, and multiple theft-related offenses.  
 
In 2010 or 2011, Applicant had a gathering at her home. After it was over, she 
discovered her “wallet and everything” was stolen. (Tr. 13-14) The police would not take 
a report because she had no idea who had stolen her wallet and there was no evidence 
of burglary. (Tr. 14) About three months later, she started getting calls about debts that 
were not hers. She wrote some of the creditors to apprise them of the situation. She 
also contacted some lending institutions with which she had bona fide debts.  
 
In addition, Applicant signed for both a truck and an apartment for a friend facing 
hard times. The individual lost their job and left Applicant with two additional balances. 
((SOR allegations 1.a ($17,689) and 1.b ($14,804)) Applicant learned that these debts 
were delinquent in 2018, after her credit report was generated. (Tr. 30) In January 2018, 
Applicant spoke with both creditors and was told they would be willing to reach a 
settlement, but no documentary evidence of such an offer or arrangement was 
introduced. (Tr. 14, 29-30, 34) 
 
With regard to the delinquent debts reflected in the SOR from 1.c-1.l, Applicant 
asserts they are the product of identity fraud, the result of the identity theft that occurred 
during the above-referenced house party, although the evidence indicated the debt at 
1.f pre-dates that event. (Tr. 40-41) Given the circumstances, she denies responsibility 
for the debts. (Tr. 15, 36-37) No formal disputes regarding these accounts have been 
documented. (Tr. 37-39) These debts amount to about $4,725, arranged in size from 
$57 to $1,438, and include debts for such things as cable service, telecommunications 
service, and retail entities. 
 
The SOR allegation at 1.m concerns a 1980 charge for four bad checks 
(misdemeanor) which led to a 60-day period of incarceration, suspended, and three 
months of probation. Applicant does not remember this incident and believes some of 
these related citations may be duplicative. (Tr. 42) A November 1981 charge was 
entered for forgery (felony) and bad check (misdemeanor), leading to a sentence of 16-
18 months of incarceration, suspended, and two years’ probation. Subsequent charges 
for bad checks were issued in 1982, 1995 (felony), and 1997, followed by a 2001 
charge of theft (misdemeanor) and shoplifting (misdemeanor). Overall, Applicant is 
confused with regard to these allegations and any related specifics. (Tr. 43) Applicant 
 
 
 
 
3 
noted that these related debts must have been satisfied for, had they not been honored, 
she would have been formally incarcerated. (Tr. 44-45) Applicant, however, had no 
documentary evidence regarding such payment to offer. 
 
In March 2018, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). She 
deliberately answered “no” in response to “Section 25. Investigations and Clearance 
Record – Government Debarment: ‘Have you EVER been debarred from government 
employment?’” In doing so, she failed to disclose she had been barred from competing 
in Office of Personnel Management (OPM) examinations or accepting appointments in 
the competitive Federal service from April 2, 1986, to April 1, 1988. She similarly 
deliberately answered “no” in response to “Section 26. Financial Record – 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts: ‘Other than previously listed, have any of 
the following happened? In the past seven (7) years, you had any possessions or 
property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? In the past seven (7) 
years, you had bills or debts turned over to collection agency? In the past seven (7) 
years, you had any account of credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for 
failing to pay as agreed?’” This admitted denial was in contradiction to her answers in 
allegations 1,a, 1,d, and 1.l, above. 
 
In addition, Applicant admitted she falsified material facts on an October 2010 
SCA in answering “no” to “Section 25. Investigations and Clearance Record – 
Government Debarment: ‘Have you EVER had a clearance or access authorization 
denied, suspended, or revoked; or been debarred from government employment?,’” 
when she was, in fact, barred from competing in OPM examinations or accepting 
appointments in the competitive Federal service from April 2, 1986, to April 1, 1988. 
 
On an August 2008 SCA, in response to “Section 18. Your Investigations 
Record: “To your knowledge, have you ever had a clearance or access authorization 
denied, suspended, or revoked, or have you ever been debarred from government 
employment?,” Applicant intentionally answered “no.” In doing so, she deliberately failed 
to disclose the fact she had been barred from competing in OPM examinations or 
accepting appointments in the competitive Federal service from April 2, 1986, to April 1, 
1988. 
 
In March 2016, Applicant completed another SCA. She falsified facts in its 
execution by answering “no” in response to “Section 22. Police Record: ‘Have you 
EVER been charged with any felony offense?”’” Her falsity was based on her earlier 
charges for bad check and forgery, noted above. A similar falsity was committed by 
Applicant with regard to the same question on a SCA from October 2010. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
4 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
necessarily include consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant 
had numerous delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so;  
and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
                                                                                  
 There are multiple delinquent debts at issue, none of which were shown to be 
fully resolved or addressed. Many debts were the result of stolen credit cards or 
identification left unsecured by Applicant in her home during a party. While this has the 
potential of raising AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant failed to offer documentation reflecting that 
she acted responsibly under the circumstances to ameliorate the situation.   
 
As for addressing the created delinquent debts at issue, it appears some are 
attributable to personal identity information and credit cards that were left unsecured 
during a house party, and to a reduction in pay. Applicant, failed, however, to show she 
acted responsibly at the time. Applicant stated that she has disputed some of her debts, 
but she provided no documentary material substantiating that claim.  
 
There is no documentation reflecting Applicant has or is receiving financial 
counseling. There is no documentary evidence showing that any of her multiple bad 
 
 
 
 
6 
checks have been honored, although the fact she has never been formally incarcerated 
appears to indicate some degree of resolution was reached. Lack of documented 
progress reflecting that Applicant has resolved her delinquent debts, brought them 
under control, or otherwise resolved them does little to give rise to any of the available 
mitigating conditions. Consequently, none of the mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying. Here, Applicant admitted making repeated falsifications on SCAs in 2016, 
2010, and 2008. These falsifications, omissions, or obfuscations concerned past 
delinquent debts, a two-year debarment in the 1980s, and a past felony criminal record. 
Because these misleading answers were intentional and deliberate, the following 
disqualifying condition applies:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 I find that the false and omitted facts, which Applicant admits were intentionally 
put forth, were done so in order to set herself in a better light. While Applicant is no 
doubt contrite, these admitted facts show a pattern that continued from 2008 through as 
recently as 2016. Insufficient facts were introduced indicating the security concerns 
raised by these egregious falsities to mitigate security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 71-year-old administrative assistant who has worked on various 
government contracts for over 25 years. A high school graduate who has completed 
 
 
 
 
7 
some college courses, she has had a secret clearance since 2008. Applicant was 
unemployed for about a month in 2007. Once earning about $60,000 a year, she now 
only earns about $32,000 under her present contract. She is a widow with two middle-
aged children. She was subject to identity and credit theft at a house party she hosted 
several years ago, and believes, without corroborating documentation, that many of the 
SOR debts resulted from that incident.   
 
Applicant provided no documentary evidence indicating she has implemented a 
plan to resolve her debts or made any progress toward addressing them. This includes 
multiple bad checks, although the fact she was not incarcerated tends to indicate those 
matters were somehow resolved. This process does not demand that an applicant pay 
all of one’s delinquent debts. It does, however, expect an applicant to describe a 
workable and manageable agreement and demonstrate by documentary evidence that 
a meaningful track record of timely and notable payment has been established. Here, 
Applicant simply failed to provide any documentation regarding any efforts to resolve 
her delinquent debts. 
 
Moreover, as for the multiple admitted falsifications on her past few SCAs, 
Applicant provided no documentation tending to mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns. In sum, Applicant failed to mitigate both financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
