1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE        
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS          
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02057 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq. 
For Applicant: Paul M. Smith, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has illegally used marijuana with varying frequency since 2010. He 
intends to continue using it. He did not mitigate the resulting security concerns. Based 
upon a review of the record as a whole, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
History of Case 
On May 31, 2017, Applicant submitted his first application for a security clearance 
(SCA). On August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse). Applicant 
answered the SOR in writing on October 6, 2018 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. 
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
February 7, 2019. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 12, 2019, setting the 
hearing for February 27, 2019. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
D into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2019.  
04/04/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old and unmarried. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2014. 
(GE 1) In April 2017, he began a position with a Federal contractor. Prior to this job, he 
worked for a private company. (GE 1)  
 
 Applicant disclosed a history of illegal drug abuse in his May 2017 SCA. He was 
arrested for possessing marijuana in July 2010 and July 2016. (GE 1) The 2010 charge 
was expunged. Applicant was fined $300 for the 2016 charge. (Tr. 21; GE 1, GE 2, GE 
3) Applicant disclosed that he first used marijuana in April 2010, and claimed that his last 
use was in July 2014. He noted that he used it five to ten times, purchased marijuana five 
times while in college and high school, and used LSD twice while in college. (GE 1)  
 
 On April 20, 2018, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM). He told the investigator that he used marijuana beyond 
the July 2014 date he disclosed in his May 2017 SCA. He stated he continued to use 
marijuana infrequently after July 2014. He stated he did not feel dependent on the drug. 
(GE 2) 
 
 Applicant intends to continue possessing and using marijuana because he 
believes that it does not affect his ability to perform his job. He used it twice in the week 
before his hearing, including the day before. He uses it socially, generally about twice a 
week. He does not have a recognized medical reason for using it.1 He is aware that his 
recreational use is illegal under both his state’s and Federal law. He used it after he 
completed his May 2017 SCA. (Tr. 18-19, 28) He has never been given a drug screening 
by his current employer. He does not know if his current employer has a zero-tolerance 
policy related to using illegal drugs. (Tr. 28-29)  
  
 Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation from members of his 
employer’s supervisory staff. All of them compliment Applicant for his high level of 
performance and reliability. (AE A, AE B, AE C, AE D) Applicant said these people are 
aware of his marijuana use, although they did not comment on it. (Tr. 25) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective 
within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
                                            
1 Medical marijuana is legal in the state in which Applicant lives. Possession of it, up to 10 grams, has been 
decriminalized since 2016.  
 
 
 
 
3 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s national security 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants eligibility 
for access to classified information or assignment in sensitive duties. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides, “Any determination under this order 
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also 
Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
 The security concerns under the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse are set out in AG ¶ 24: 
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has illegally used marijuana since 2010, with varying 
frequency, and subsequent to completing his 2017 SCA. He intends to continue using it 
in the future. The evidence establishes security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
AG & 26 provides conditions that could possibly mitigate the drug-related security 
concerns raised in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 There is no evidence to establish any of the above mitigating conditions. Applicant 
has a long history of abusing illegal drugs that began in 2010, while in high school. His 
regular marijuana use continues to date, and casts doubt on his judgment. He 
acknowledges that possessing and using marijuana, especially while working for a 
Federal contractor, is illegal and may jeopardize his employment, but expresses his 
intention to continue doing so. He has a long history of frequent marijuana use, but has 
not been evaluated for substance abuse or addiction, or participated in a treatment 
program.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 After listening to his testimony and observing his demeanor, I found Applicant to 
be candid about his history of marijuana use and staunchly determined to continue using 
 
 
 
 
6 
it, despite the fact that it violates state and Federal criminal laws and may jeopardize his 
request for a security clearance. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. It raises serious 
concerns about his ability or willingness to follow rules and regulations. He failed to meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for drug 
involvement and substance misuse.  
 
Statutory Prohibition2 
 
 Independent of analysis under the AG, the Bond Amendment, 50 U.S.C. § 3343, 
prohibits Federal agencies from granting or renewing national security eligibility to any 
unlawful user of a controlled substance. The term, “unlawful user,” is not further defined 
in terms of frequency or recency. However, this statutory prohibition clearly applies to 
Applicant at present, given his ongoing and regular marijuana use, and his expressed 
intent to continue using it.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
2 See Directive Enclosure 2: Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines, dated December 10, 2016, at ¶ E.2 and Appendix B. 
