1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00430 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Shirin Asgari, Esq. 
______________ 
04/19/2019
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 25, 2017. On 
August 10, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, personal conduct. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2018, with a detailed, eight-page 
answer, admitting in part, and denying in part, the SOR allegations. He provided 
explanations and several attachments to his answer including: five character reference 
letters; evaluation and counseling records; a letter from the county district attorney 
rejecting charges against Applicant; copies of numerous awards, certificates, and letters 
 
2 
 
 
of appreciation and commendation. These were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
– F and admitted without objection.  
 
 Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on January 25, 2019. On February 7, 2019, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
March 1, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and his counsel submitted an additional 
performance evaluation from his current employer, which was marked as AE G, and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2007. (Tr. 26) He 
married in 2010 and divorced in 2012. He remarried in 2014 and divorced in 2016. He 
enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 2014 and finished first in his class at culinary specialist 
school. He also received an accelerated promotion to petty officer, and awards including 
the Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service Medal, and a Surface Warfare Pin. 
(Tr. 29-30) He attached documents to his answer to the SOR including excellent 
performance evaluations, letters of appreciation, and certificates of commendation for 
his service in the Navy. (Tr. 16) He reports no children. Applicant has been employed as 
a food runner at a hotel while awaiting the outcome of his application to be an Arabic 
speaking linguist for a major federal contractor, which is contingent on obtaining his 
security clearance. (Tr. 24-25)  
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e. (Answer). He admitted 
in part, and denied in part, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, because he 
adamantly denies that he committed domestic assault or battery against his wife, and 
she later recanted her allegations. The county district attorney dropped all charges 
against Applicant and the restraining order was rescinded. (AE D, Tr. 38-39)  
 
 Applicant testified that he received a general discharge, under honorable 
conditions as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e due to two events that occurred within 30 days of 
each other. (Tr. 22-23) The first incident, at the end of June 2016, occurred due to a 
miscommunication between Applicant and his senior chief. (Tr. 32) Applicant had 
submitted a request to take 4-5 days annual leave to go home to assist his sister after 
her back surgery. (Tr. 33) Applicant had approved leave papers in hand. A week before 
he departed the ship to go on leave, Applicant learned that his sister’s surgery was 
postponed and he needed to request an additional day of leave. He did so, and 
received verbal authorization to simply extend his leave from his petty officer first class 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 25, 2017 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summaries of his personal subject interviews (PSI) in May 
2017. (GE 1-2) 
 
 
3 
 
 
(E-6) supervisor. (Tr. 34, 65) However, the first class failed to log this extension into the 
system.  
 
Applicant testified credibly that he did not have sufficient time to submit a formal 
leave request in writing through his chain of command (COC) because several of his 
seniors were away on leave. (Tr. 47-48) Applicant accepts responsibility for this 
mistake, as he failed to follow up and ensure that the leave was formally recorded. (Tr. 
50, answer) When he returned from leave, he was charged with various Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ) violations as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant went to 
nonjudicial punishment (NJP) for these offenses and he was sentenced to 30 days 
restriction and extra duty and demoted in rank by one grade. (Tr. 35) In a statement on 
behalf of Applicant, submitted at his NJP, the first class corroborated that he verbally 
authorized the extension of leave, but he was overwhelmed with work, and forgot to log 
it. (Tr. 64)   
 
Applicant denied in part the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d, which all 
arose out of the second incident in July 2016. While he was serving his NJP sentence of 
restriction to the ship, Applicant was enduring a very difficult time with his wife. One 
evening, he made repeated calls to his wife that went unanswered. (Tr. 35-36) His wife 
also stopped responding to text messages. Applicant became extremely worried 
because of earlier text messages from her where she said she was having a very bad 
day. (Tr. 54) Previously she had a miscarriage while he was at sea. (Tr. 36) Applicant 
left the ship without authorization, and he went to his nearby home to find his wife with 
an interloper. (Tr. 37-38) It was plain to see she was having an adulterous affair. 
Applicant was shocked and argued with his wife after the interloper departed. During the 
argument, she arose quickly from the couch, and he gently pushed her back with an 
open hand, fearing that she was about to do something rash. (Tr. 38) She was not 
injured. She called the police and he was arrested. (Tr. 38)  
 
Applicant disclosed both of the afore mentioned incidents fully, as well as the 
resultant NJPs and General Discharge, in his April 2017 SCA. Following his arrest in 
July 2016, Applicant’s wife became embarrassed and sorry for calling the police. (Tr. 
39) She convinced the prosecutors to dismiss all charges against Applicant, and she 
withdrew the domestic violence restraining order alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d as frivolous. (AE 
D) He had a second NJP nonetheless, where he was sentenced to reduction in rank 
from E-4 (Petty Officer) to E-3 (Seaman), and 45 days restriction and extra duty. (Tr. 63) 
Applicant subsequently obtained an amicable divorce from his wife in December 2016. 
(Tr. 41)   
        
 Applicant testified that he lost substantial Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
educational and other benefits due to his General Discharge. (Tr. 74) He provided two 
excellent performance evaluations for each year from 2014 to 2016. (AE B) He also 
provided six favorable character reference letters from his supervisors and a colleague. 
One was from Applicant’s senior chief (E-8), who was the supervisor of the first class 
who granted verbal authority to extend his leave. (AE A) They attest to Applicant’s 
character, integrity, honesty and work ethic. He also provided several letters of 
 
4 
 
 
appreciation and certificates of commendation for his military service. I found his 
testimony was direct and candid. 
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
   The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is 
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during 
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following 
normally will result in an unfavorable national security eligibility 
determination, security clearance action, or cancellation of further 
processing for national security eligibility . . .  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
 (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified information. This 
includes but is not limited to, considerations of: 
        
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations 
 
 Applicant admits to wrongfully leaving his ship without authorization, while he 
was still on restriction, on the night when he discovered his wife cheating. He also takes 
responsibility for not confirming that his verbally authorized extension of leave was 
formally entered into the unit’s computer diary and properly approved. He was led to 
 
6 
 
 
believe it had been approved after a discussion with a supervisor. The Government 
provided substantial evidence of his rule violations on these occasions and his general 
discharge. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d)(3), are implicated and the focus shifts to a 
determination of which, if any, of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 17. Conditions that could potent ia l l y  mitigate security concerns  
            Include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant testified credibly that he was under a great deal of stress related to his 
marriage when he left his ship without authority. He relied to his detriment on a 
colleague, a petty officer first class, to enter the verbal extension in the unit diary. He did 
not follow through and confirm that the extension had been properly granted. He pled 
guilty and accepted his NJP punishment although he appears to have had a valid 
defense. He has already been punished for both transgressions by the Navy. He 
received two NJP punishments including loss of a stripe, restriction, and extra duty. 
Additionally, because he had two disciplinary incidents so close in time in the summer of 
2016, the Navy gave Applicant a General Discharge under honorable conditions. He 
lost substantial Post-911 GI Education Bill benefits and his chosen career as a result. I 
find that his transgressions were committed almost three years ago. They occurred 
under unique circumstances of his wife’s infidelity and such misconduct is unlikely to 
recur. He has divorced his wife, left the Navy, volunteered to become a linguist, and 
taken other positive steps to alleviate stressors. AG ¶¶ 17 (c) and (d) apply. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant disclosed his disciplinary problems in the Navy in his SCA and 
concedes he made mistakes. He was already punished for those minor transgressions. 
He wants to continue to serve DOD as an Arabic linguist for a contractor. His judgment 
no longer remains a security concern. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that his 
personal relations are under control, and he will not repeat his previous misconduct. 
The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                                      FOR Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 2.e:                                       For Applicant  
                                     
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
