       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
 ---------------------------------         )       ISCR  Case No.  18-02236     
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se      
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On October 4, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017.
04/08/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 30, 2018, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on January 31, 2019, and interposed no objections to the materials in
the FORM. He did not supplement the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March
22, 2019. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated five delinquent consumer
debts exceeding $26,000 and (b) filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in September
2007 and received his discharged in January 2008. (Items 3 and 6) Allegedly, his
accumulated delinquent debts remain  unresolved and outstanding.
                
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations covered by
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and 1.f. with explanations. He claimed he returned the vehicle covered by
SOR ¶ 1.a and offered no explanations or plans related to the debts covered by SOR  ¶¶
1.b-1.d, or his bankruptcy petition and discharge in 2008. Applicant denied the allegations
covered by SOR ¶ 1.e without any explanations or claims.
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old service technical services representative for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in 1992, divorced in 1993, and remarried in 1995. (Items 4-5) 
He has ten children from this marriage. He earned an associate’s degree in April 2008.
(Items 4-5) Applicant enlisted in the Army in October 1984 and served two years of active
duty and two years of inactive Reserve duty. (Items 4-5) He received an honorable
discharge in November 1988. 
Since June 2010, Applicant has worked full time for his current employer, with
some overlap with his company’s parent corporation, which separated from his current
employer in April 2017. (Items 4-5) While employed full time by his current employer,
Applicant worked contemporaneously as a part-time nutrition aide for a local nursing
center. (Items 4-5) 
Applicant’s finances
In September 2007, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. (Items 1
and 6) Prior to filing his petition, he certified to completing required financial counseling
without providing a debt repayment plan. (Item 6) Applicant scheduled assets totaling
$277,371 and liabilities totaling $369,111. (Item 6) He scheduled secured claims totaling
$266,000 and unsecured non-priority claims totaling $102,866. (Item 6)   Records confirm
2
that he received his bankruptcy discharge in January 2008 with no discernible assets to
distribute to creditors. 
Between 2012 and 2018 Applicant accumulated additional delinquent debts (five in
all) exceeding $26,000. Since returning to full-time employment in 2010, following a brief
period of unemployment, he has not provided any documented proof of his addressing
any of these debts. (Items 1-9) While he claimed an intent to work out payment
arrangements with his creditors, he has provided no documented proof of undertaking
any repayment arrangements with his creditors to date. (Items 1-9)
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
3
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
4
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts
after receiving a Chapter 7 discharge in 2008, in what can be characterized as a no-
asset case. Since his emergence from bankruptcy in 2008, he has accumulated over
$26,000 in delinquent debts without any probative explanation aside from a brief period
of unemployment in 2010. Applicant’s history of financial difficulties warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a),
“inability to satisfy debts”; 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to
do so”;  and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s admitted delinquent debts negate the need for any independent
proof. See Directive 5220.6 at E3.1.14; McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006).
Each of Applicant’s admitted debts are fully documented and create some judgment
issues. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving tax filing lapses
and debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of addressing and resolving debt delinquencies are critical
to an assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in
following rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified
information or to holding a sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App.
Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s
cited circumstances (brief unemployment in 2010) provide little extenuating benefit.  MC
¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances,” has minimal application to Applicant’s situation. His failure to
address his debt delinquencies after he returned to full-time employment status in June
2010  precludes him from taking advantage of the “acted responsibly” prong of MC ¶
20(b).
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely resolution of
delinquent debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  In
Applicant’s case, his failures or inability to establish documented payment initiatives 
with his listed SOR creditors, both before and after the initiation of the security
clearance process, prelude favorable findings and conclusions with respect to raised
security concerns over the state of his finances. 
5
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his delinquent debts to merit enough positive credit to
mitigate financial concerns. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his
finances reflect too little evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment to
overcome reasonable doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that his finances are not
sufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a
security clearance. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and
circumstances of this case is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:                Against Applicant
                                                                       Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
6
  
7
  
8
