KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board has noted that: “Public confidence in the fairness and integrity of the
industrial security program depends, to a large degree, on there being both the substance and the
appearance of a fair and impartial adjudication after reasonable consideration of the record
evidence as a whole.  If an Administrative Judge makes statements or acts in a manner that could
lead a reasonable person to question whether the Judge considered all the record evidence, then a
party could understandably question whether he or she received fair consideration of the
evidence it presented.”  In this case, the number of errors, some of which are substantial, in the
Judge’s decision raises this problem. Adverse decision remanded.  
CASENO: 18-01601.a1
DATE: 04/25/2019
DATE: April 25, 2019
In Re:
---------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-01601
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
3, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 27, 2019, after considering the record, Administrative Judge
Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant, who is 44 years old, has a child from his first marriage and reported no military
service.  From 2002 to 2016, he worked for various employers with interspersed brief periods of
unemployment and has since worked for his current employer.  
The SOR alleged that Applicant had a tax lien for about $2,600; a charged-off home equity
loan for about $27,000, a mortgage account that was foreclosed in 2013; and a mortgage account
that was foreclosed in 2016.  Applicant admitted each SOR allegation with explanations.  The state
tax lien has been resolved.  The home equity loan remains outstanding.  It is unclear whether either
of the foreclosures resulted in deficiency balances.  The Judge found for Applicant on the tax lien
and against him on the remaining three allegations.  Applicant has not established that his finances
are sufficiently stabilized to meet the eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance.  
Discussion    
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  In doing so, he argues his
clearance was revoked based on “inaccurate and or inexact” information.1  Appeal Brief at 1.  We
examine disputed findings of fact to determine if they are supported by substantial evidence, i.e.,
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-04094 at 2 (App.
Bd. Apr. 20, 2018)(quoting Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
One significant error in the Judge’s findings of fact involves the amount of one of the
foreclosed mortgages.  In his background interview, Applicant stated that he cosigned a mortgage
with his mother that was foreclosed.2  The two credit reports in the record reflect the high credit
amount for that mortgage loan was about $86,300.  File of Relevant Material (FORM) Items 5 and
6.  The Judge, however, found that Applicant had cosigned a note for that mortgage in the amount
1 One of Applicant’s contentions is that he provided proof that he paid the tax lien.  However, the Judge found
in favor of him on that allegation.
2 This mortgage was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.
2
of $206,450.  The Judge may have mistakenly relied on the amount of a non-alleged mortgage listed
in one credit report instead of the foreclosed mortgage alleged in the SOR.3  The Judge also found
that it was unclear whether either of the foreclosed mortgages had deficiency balances.  The two
credit reports in the record, however, both reflect zero balances of each of the foreclosed mortgages. 
The Judge did not address in his decision the zero balances in the credit reports.  Another error
involves the Judge’s reference to Applicant’s “failure to timely file address his state tax obligations
. . . .”   Decision at 5.  Tax filing deficiencies were not raised as an issue in this case.  Applicant
further notes that the Judge erred in finding that his daughter was from his first wife and that he had
no military service.  Applicant’s security clearance application reflects that he served four years in
the military and was honorably discharged.  FORM Item 3.
The Board has noted that: “Public confidence in the fairness and integrity of the industrial
security program depends, to a large degree, on there being both the substance and the appearance
of a fair and impartial adjudication after reasonable consideration of the record evidence as a whole. 
If an Administrative Judge makes statements or acts in a manner that could lead a reasonable person
to question whether the Judge considered all the record evidence, then a party could understandably
question whether he or she received fair consideration of the evidence it presented.”  ISCR Case No.
02-23979 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2004).  In this case, the number of errors, some of which are
substantial, in the Judge’s decision raises this problem.  
Given the errors identified above, we conclude the best resolution of this appeal is to remand
the case to the Judge to correct the errors and to issue another decision consistent with the Directive.
3 The non-alleged mortgage was listed as past-due 90 days in one credit report.  FORM Item 6.  In his
background interview, Applicant indicated that he was able to obtain a loan modification for that mortgage and resolve
its delinquency.  FORM Item 4.  
3
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
