 
 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
  
  
    
    
  
   
 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
) 
[Redacted] ) ADP Case No. 18-02107 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
04/26/2019 
Decision
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 4, 2017. On August 17, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Manual 
5200.02, Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP), (April 3, 2017) 
(Manual);1 and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for 
all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
1 DOD Manual 5200.02 cancelled and incorporated DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
Program (January 1987) (Regulation). The Manual covers sensitive positions but it did not include the
specific provisions in the Regulation for ADP cases. ADP cases continue to be adjudicated in accordance
with the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004.
1
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
                                                          
    
Applicant answered the SOR on October 5, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
24, 2019, and the case was assigned to me on February 26, 2019. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a notice of hearing on March 4, 2019, 
scheduling the hearing for March 28, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified but did not present the testimony of any other witnesses or any
documentary evidence. I kept the record open until April 5, 2019, to enable her to 
present documentary evidence. She timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, 
consisting of a cover letter and a credit report dated March 4, 2019, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2019. 
Findings of Fact2 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted the allegations in  SOR  ¶¶ 1.a,  
1.b, 1.d-1.t, and 1.ll. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.u-1.kk. She stated 
that the state tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c had been paid, and that the medical debts
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.u-1.kk were disputed and removed from her credit record. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel conceded that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c had been 
paid and withdrew that allegation. (Tr. 9.) Applicant’s admissions in her answer to the 
SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.
Applicant is a 39-year-old customer-service auditor employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2017. She married in July 2004 and divorced in October 2011. 
She has two children, ages 15 and 10. (Tr. 20.) She has been employed continuously in 
various jobs since at least January 2007, the period covered in her e-QIP. She has 
never held a security clearance or eligibility for a public trust position. 
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 2015. It was
dismissed in February 2016 for failure to make the required payments. (Tr. 23.). When 
the petition was dismissed, $400 had been disbursed to creditors and $689 had been 
disbursed for administrative expenses. (GX 4; GX 5.)
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges the Chapter 13 bankruptcy. SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.ll allege debts 
reflected in Applicant’s credit reports from April 2017 (GX 2) and June 2018 (GX 3) and 
totaling about $40,000. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.kk are medical debts 
totaling about $2,000. The evidence pertaining to the debts alleged in the SOR is
summarized below.
SOR ¶ 1.b: judgment for $1,710 filed in July 2017. This judgment was for 
unpaid rent. Applicant has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 24.)
SOR ¶ 1.d: deficiency after repossession of a car, placed for collection of 
$9,528. Applicant has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 27.)
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
2
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
SOR ¶ 1.e: student loan placed for collection of $3,801. Applicant incurred 
this loan when she attended college from August 1997 to May 1998. She has made no 
payments on this debt. (GX 1 at 14; Tr. 27.) 
SOR ¶ 1.f: credit-card account past due for $2,692. The last activity on this 
account was in October 2013. (GX 2 at 5.) Applicant has made no payments since that 
date and has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 28.) 
SOR ¶ 1.g: telecommunications bill placed for collection of $453. Applicant
has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 28.)
SOR ¶ 1.h: past-due rent placed for collection of $3,554. Applicant incurred 
this debt in January through July 2016. She has taken no action to resolve it. (Tr. 29.)
SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.n, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t: medical bills in various amounts. Applicant
testified that she believed these bills were covered by Medicaid. She contacted the 
creditors and gave them her Medicaid account number, but she did not know whether
the creditors submitted any of the bills to Medicaid. She has not contacted these 
creditors since March 2017, has not made any payments on these bills, and has not
filed disputes with the credit bureaus or taken any other action to resolve them. (Tr. 32-
34.) 
SOR ¶ 1.o: gym membership account placed for collection of $947. 
Applicant was uncertain when she incurred this debt, but she believed it was in 2014. 
She has taken no action to resolve it. (Tr. 33.)
SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.r: cellphone bills placed for collection of $520 and $416. 
These bills were incurred at the same time for two different lines. Applicant has taken no 
action to resolve them. (Tr. 33-34.) 
SOR ¶¶ 1.u-1.kk: various medical bills placed for collection. Applicant 
testified that she disputed the debts online on the ground that the bills should have been 
covered by Medicaid. (Tr. 35.) The debts are not reflected in her March 2019 credit 
report. (AX A.) They are resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.ll: past-due rent placed for collection of $4,478. Applicant testified
that she contacted the creditor in early 2018 and disputed the amount due. She testified 
that she owed rent for two months, totaling $1,600, but the creditor claimed that she 
owed more because of trash in the apartment. (Tr. 49.) She testified that the creditor
would not accept less than the full amount. (Tr. 49-50.) Applicant lived in this apartment 
until June 2018, when she moved into a house that she inherited from her father. (Tr. 
38-39.) She has not made any payments, established a payment plan, filed a dispute 
with the credit bureaus, or taken any other action to resolve this debt.  
Applicant earns between $1,000 and $1,200 per month, depending on how many
hours she works. Her son receives $140 per month because his father is disabled. She
has no savings or investment accounts. Her medical expenses are now covered by
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Medicaid. She receives no child support from the fathers of her two children. She has  
never sought or received financial counseling, other than what was required for her 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. She suffers from diabetes and chronic migraines, which are 
sometimes severe enough to keep her from going to work. (Tr. 39-46) 
Policies
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. The standard set out in the Manual and the adjudicative
guidelines for assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and
trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security. AG ¶ 2.b.  
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal  is a fair,  
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive]
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue eligibility for access to
sensitive information. 
4
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly
compromise classified or sensitive information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to
protecting classified information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record establishes 
the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;
and 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
5
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control; 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely.
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s diabetes and chronic migraines are 
conditions largely beyond her control, but she has not acted responsibly. She has not 
taken any action to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.h, 1.o-1.r, and 1.ll. She 
initially disputed the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.n, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t, but she 
has taken no further follow-up action since March 2017. 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought or received any financial 
counseling except the financial counseling required in connection with her Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. Her financial problems are not under control. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of payments or 
payment agreements for her delinquent debts. 
AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.u-1.kk. It is
not established for the other debts alleged in the SOR. She has not submitted 
documentary evidence showing the basis for disputes of the medical debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.n, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t, and she has not followed up on her contacts with the 
creditors since March 2017. She testified that she disputed the amount of the debt
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ll, but she submitted no documentary evidence of the basis for the 
dispute, and it has not been resolved. She has not disputed the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b-1.h and 1.o-1.r. Although she disputed some of the non-medical debts with the 
original creditors, she submitted no evidence that she filed disputes with the credit 
bureaus. 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
6
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to  
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2.d. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness
concerns raised by her delinquent debts. 
Formal Findings 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:     Withdrawn  
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.r:    Against  Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.u-1.kk:    For  Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.ll:     Against  Applicant  
Conclusion 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility is denied. 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
7
