1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- ) ISCR Case No. 18-02005 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement and 
substance misuse, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On September 9, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a set of interrogatories. On September 11, 2018, 
Applicant responded to those interrogatories. On October 15, 2018, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security 
Executive Agent (SEAD 4), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
04/23/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
2016) (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 30, 2018. In a notarized statement, dated 
January 3, 2019, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by DOHA on March 1, 2019, and he 
was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative 
Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on March 7, 2019. His 
response was due on April 6, 2019. Applicant timely submitted one document in response 
to the FORM, and it was admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
April 16, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the factual allegations 
pertaining to drug involvement and substance misuse of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.); 
and two of the factual allegations pertaining to criminal conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.d. and 2.f.). 
He denied the remaining allegations as well as the principal allegation pertaining to 
personal conduct (SOR ¶ 3.b.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as a mechanic with his current employer since February 2014. A 2000 high school 
graduate, Applicant attended a technical institute and received a heating, ventilation, and 
air conditioning (HVAC) certification in 2001. He has never served with the U.S. military. 
He was granted an interim security clearance at some unspecified point between 
September 2016 and February 2018.1 Applicant has never been married, but he has six 
children, born in 2002, 2004, 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2016. 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): Applicant was a substance abuser whose primary substance of 
choice was marijuana. He started using and purchasing marijuana in 1997, when he was 
approximately 15 years old. He started smoking marijuana at least weekly, and that 
                                                          
1 Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview, dated February 19, 2018), at 8. 
 
3 
                                      
 
frequency continued until approximately 2012 or 2013. Thereafter, until December 2017, 
he purportedly reduced his marijuana use to one or two times per year. During his 
interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 
February 19, 2018, Applicant admitted that his most recent use of marijuana occurred two 
weeks before he was interviewed.2 However, he changed his story in his response to the 
interrogatories when he stated that his last and most recent use of marijuana occurred in 
December 2017.3 Regardless of the most recent date, Applicant’s last use was well after 
he submitted his 2016 e-QIP. Applicant indicated that marijuana made him calm and 
enabled him to relax. While he did not consider himself to be dependent upon marijuana, 
as of his OPM interview, he was unable to quit altogether. Applicant never grew 
marijuana, and he generally purchased it “off the streets,” as he does not have a supplier. 
   
 (SOR ¶ 1.b.): In November 2015, while in a foreign country, Applicant was arrested 
by the local police for suspected violations of the Cannabis Control Act and the nation’s 
customs law. A female friend whom Applicant had met during a temporary assignment in 
the United States shipped him a package containing marijuana cookies. Applicant 
claimed that he was unaware that the package had been shipped to him, that he never 
expected it, and that he never received it. The package was intercepted by customs 
authorities. On November 23, 2015, pursuant to a search warrant, the police searched 
his hotel room and seized a glass pipe containing traces of marijuana. Applicant was 
arrested and taken to the local precinct where he was held for 21 days, after which the 
local prosecutor declined to prosecute Applicant. He was released.4  
 
 Applicant stated that he decided to stop using marijuana due to new religious 
beliefs; that he no longer associates with persons using illegal substances; and that he 
no longer frequents locations where drugs are being used. In his responses to the 
interrogatories, Applicant acknowledged that he had never participated in a drug or 
alcohol treatment rehabilitation program, or received any counseling. Instead, he 
practices self-control and prays. However, in his response to the FORM, he stated that 
he planned to attend his first Narcotics Anonymous meeting on April 1, 2019.5 
 
In addition to marijuana, Applicant also had a relationship with cocaine, not by 
using it, but rather by selling it as a sideline activity to raise extra cash. He contended that 
he last did so about seven years before his 2018 OPM interview, which would make his 
most recent sale as taking place in approximately 2011.  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): On or about July 2, 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
possession of a firearm while in possession of drugs, a felony; and manufacturing, sales, 
and possession of a controlled substance, also a felony. The controlled substance was 
                                                          
2 Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 8. 
 
3 Item 4 (Response to Interrogatories, dated September 11, 2018), at 1. 
 
4 Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 7-8. 
 
5 Item 4 (Response to Interrogatories), supra note 3, at 1; Response to the FORM, undated. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
approximately one gram of cocaine. The charges were dismissed in September 2003.6 
Applicant contended that the charges were dismissed because the search of his vehicle 
was “illegal.”7 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 In addition to the criminal conduct associated with Applicant’s drug involvement 
and substance misuse, described above, Applicant has a history of arrests and charges 
for a variety of activities:  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.): On May 24, 2010, he was charged with contempt of court for failure 
to appear, a misdemeanor. On December 9, 2011, he was found guilty of the charge, and 
he was ordered to pay restitution;8 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.c.): On November 24, 2010, he was charged with contempt of court. No 
disposition was recorded;9 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.d.): On October 28, 2011, after being in a bar fight protecting the mother 
of one of his children from an assault, he was arrested and charged with malicious 
wounding, a felony. He and the other individual involved remained in jail overnight. At the 
subsequent court hearing in February 2012, no witnesses appeared, and the charge was 
nolle prossed;10 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.e.): On May 1, 2014, he was charged with contempt of court. In 
September 2014, the charge was dismissed;11 and 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.f.): On June 24, 2016, he was arrested and charged with assault and 
battery on a family member, a misdemeanor, after he slapped his daughter in the face, 
busting her lip. The child’s mother called the police. Applicant appeared in the juvenile 
and domestic relations court in July 2017, and the court ordered a two-year deferment 
(under advisement) with eventual and dismissal, providing Applicant completes a 
parenting class and an anger management course.12 Thus, he remains in this status until 
July 2019. As of February 19, 2018, Applicant claimed that he had completed the 
                                                          
6 Item 5 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Identification Record (IR), dated September 17, 
2016), at 5; Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 6. 
 
7 Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 6. 
 
8 Item 5 (FBI IR), supra note 6, at 5. 
 
9 Item 5 (FBI IR), supra note 6, at 5. 
 
10 Item 5 (FBI IR), supra note 6, at 6; Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 5. 
 
11 Item 5 (FBI IR), supra note 6, at 6. 
 
12 Item 6 (Case Details, dated September 25, 2018); Item 5 (FBI IR), supra note 6, at 6; Item 4 
(Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 5-6. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
parenting class at a local church, one evening per week for six weeks, but he 
acknowledged that he had not yet taken the anger management course, and such a 
course was not yet scheduled.13 As of the closing of the record, Applicant had not 
submitted any evidence that he had completed the anger management course, that the 
charges had been dismissed, or that he remains “under advisement.” 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶ 3.a.): This allegation cross-references the SOR allegations associated 
with Applicant’s drug involvement and substance misuse, and criminal conduct. 
(SOR ¶ 3.b.):  On September 9, 2016, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he 
responded to certain questions pertaining to his illegal use of drugs or drug activity found 
in Section 23. The most significant question, and the one alleged in the SOR, was 
essentially as follows: In the last seven (7) years have you illegally used any drugs or 
controlled substances? Use of a drug or controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, 
inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise consuming any drug or controlled 
substance. Two other questions, while not alleged in the SOR,14 were also asked: In the 
last seven (7) years have you been involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, 
cultivation, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, handling or sale of any 
drug or controlled substance?; and Have you ever illegally used or otherwise been 
involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance other 
than previously listed? Applicant answered “no” to the combined questions.15 He omitted 
the November 2015 violation of the foreign Cannabis Control Act and customs law for 
which he was in jail for 21 days; his admitted use of marijuana that continued until after 
the e-QIP was completed; his purchases of marijuana; and the fact that he held an interim 
security clearance at some unspecified point between September 2016 (when he was still 
using marijuana) and February 2018. He certified that his responses to those questions 
were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but, because 
of his omissions, the responses to those questions were, in fact, false.  
Other than simply denying that he had deliberately falsified material facts in his e-
QIP, Applicant has not offered any explanations for the omissions. He did not claim, for 
                                                          
13 Item 4 (Enhanced Subject Interview), supra note 1, at 6. 
 
14 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal 
Board. (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s unlisted and unalleged 
drug activity will be considered only for the five purposes listed above.  
 
15 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated September 9, 2016), at 31. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
example, that he misinterpreted the questions, or that he forgot his drug involvement and 
substance misuse. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”16 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”17   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”18 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.19  
                                                          
16 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
17 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
18 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
7 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”20  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”21 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Abuse is set out in AG ¶ 24:       
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Furthermore, on October 25, 2014, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Memorandum ES 2014-00674, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana 
Use, which states: 
                                                          
 
20 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
21 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
[C]hanges to state laws and the laws of the District of Columbia pertaining 
to marijuana use do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (Reference H and I). An individual's disregard of federal law 
pertaining to the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains 
adjudicatively relevant in national security determinations. As always, 
adjudicative authorities are expected to evaluate claimed or developed use 
of, or involvement with, marijuana using the current adjudicative criteria. 
The adjudicative authority must determine if the use of, or involvement with, 
marijuana raises questions about the individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with law, rules, and regulations, 
including federal laws, when making eligibility decisions of persons 
proposed for, or occupying, sensitive national security positions. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions under AG ¶ 25 that could raise security 
concerns in this case:  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia;  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
Applicant admittedly purchased, possessed and used marijuana for approximately 
two decades; was arrested in a foreign country in 2015 for receiving marijuana, and 
possession of a glass pipe containing traces of marijuana; and was arrested in 2003 for 
manufacturing, sale, and possession of a controlled substance (cocaine). He also 
admittedly sold cocaine. Although Applicant claimed during his OPM interview, and 
thereafter in his responses to the SOR and the FORM that he would no longer use illegal 
substances, because he continued to use marijuana even after he completed his e-QIP, 
his recent conversion does not rise to the level of clearly and convincingly being 
committed to discontinuing such substance misuse. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), 25(f), and 25(g) 
have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 26 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) minimally apply. Applicant’s two decades of drug 
involvement and substance misuse associated with marijuana was not infrequent, and it 
continued until at least December 2017 or February 2018, depending on which version of 
Applicant’s story is to be believed. On the other hand, his involvement with the sale of 
cocaine apparently ceased with his arrest in July 2003, and there is no evidence that he 
has had any more recent involvement. Although Applicant denied any drug involvement 
on his e-QIP, upon being confronted by the OPM investigator, he finally acknowledged 
his history with drugs. However, because of his changing narrative regarding his most 
recent use of marijuana and the commencement of his supposed abstinence, there is 
some question regarding the accuracy of his current claim of abstinence and his claim 
that he has avoided drug-using individuals and locations where drugs are being used. 
Applicant claimed that one of the reasons for his new attitude regarding drugs is due to 
his new religious beliefs, but he failed to explain what those beliefs are with respect to 
drugs, and when he first started following those beliefs. 
 
While Applicant’s purported period of abstinence from illegal and authorized 
substances is to be encouraged, considering the lengthy period of his drug involvement 
and substance misuse, even accepting Applicant’s stated period of such abstinence, the 
period of abstinence is simply too brief to establish confidence that a relapse will not 
occur. Under the circumstances, Applicant’s actions continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes conditions under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security concerns: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
 
10 
                                      
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted;  
 
(c)  individual is currently on parole or probation; and 
 
(d) violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-mandated rehabilitation program. 
 
My discussion related to Applicant’s drug involvement and substance misuse is 
adopted herein. Applicant has established a lengthy pattern of criminality involving 
felonies and misdemeanors, commencing with his 2003 arrest and continuing through his 
2016 arrest. They include a variety of charges, police involvement, court involvement, 
and results. He was jailed from overnight to three weeks, and is currently under 
advisement. Some charges were dismissed or nolle prossed. Applicant’s willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations is suspect, for he routinely ignored the law when 
he consistently purchased, possessed, and used marijuana; possessed and sold cocaine; 
was in contempt of court on several occasions; got into a bar fight; and assaulted a family 
member. The “under advisement” designation is akin to a probation. Moreover, while 
Applicant is to be under advisement until July 2019, and he has offered no evidence that 
he has completed one of the requirements set out by the court – completion of an anger 
management course – it appears that he has not, and may not, complete the court-
mandated program. Based on the actions described above, AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(b), 31(c), 
and 31(d) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from criminal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense;  
and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. While a substantial period may have 
elapsed since his 2003 arrest, Applicant’s other more recent criminal behavior simply 
continued until at least December 2017 or February 2018. He is a recidivist, displaying a 
long pattern of drug involvement and substance misuse from 1997, with and without 
police or court involvement; contempt of court charges; and two incidents involving 
 
11 
                                      
 
physical assaults (malicious wounding in 2011, and assault and battery of a family 
member in 2016). Furthermore, he is still under advisement for his most recent charges. 
Applicant did not offer any evidence of a good employment record or constructive 
community involvement.  
 
A person should not be held forever accountable for misconduct from the past, but 
in this instance, the most recent criminal conduct, in this case involving his continued drug 
involvement and substance misuse, was in December 2017 or February 2018. Given his 
cavalier attitude towards laws, rules, and regulations, Applicant’s history of criminal 
conduct, under the circumstances, continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
 
12 
                                      
 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
My discussions related to Applicant’s drug involvement and substance misuse, and 
Applicant’s criminal conduct, are adopted herein. At the time Applicant completed his e-
QIP in September 2016, he concealed any references to his history of drug involvement 
and substance misuse, although at that time, he was still using marijuana. Applicant’s 
comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if his submissions were deliberate 
falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or merely inaccurate answers that were the result of 
oversight or misunderstanding of the true facts on his part. Proof of incorrect answers, 
standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when 
the falsification or omission occurred. As an administrative judge, I must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning Applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the alleged 
falsifications or omissions occurred.  
 
I have considered the entire record, including Applicant’s denial of the SOR 
allegation, and have noticed his failure to address the allegation with any specific 
explanation.22 Applicant’s simple denial, without any explanations for his e-QIP response, 
in my view, is simply not persuasive evidence of Applicant’s actual intent. In addition, 
aside from his lack of candor with respect to the e-QIP, there is Applicant’s lengthy history 
of drug involvement and substance misuse, his criminal conduct, and his personal 
conduct. As to the deliberate falsification on the e-QIP regarding his drug activity, AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 16(c) have been established. As to the combined drug involvement and 
substance misuse, criminal conduct, and Applicant’s personal conduct allegations, AG ¶ 
16(c) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
                                                          
22 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of 
education and other experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to 
disclose [significant facts] on an application was deliberate).  
 
 
13 
                                      
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Neither of the conditions apply. Applicant’s lengthy history of drug involvement and 
substance misuse continued until at least December 2017 or February 2018; and his false 
response to the e-QIP inquiries occurred in September 2016, before he supposedly 
stopped using marijuana. Applicant was confronted with the true facts by an OPM 
investigator in February 2018, but before that interview, he made no efforts to correct the 
omissions, concealments, or falsifications. Far from being infrequent, Applicant’s drug 
involvement and substance misuse was routine for decades, and his attitude towards 
laws, rules, and regulations also lasted for a lengthy period. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.23  
  
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 37-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving as a mechanic with his current 
employer since February 2014. A 2000 high school graduate, Applicant received an 
                                                          
23 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
HVAC certification in 2001. He has purportedly been abstinent from illegal substances 
since December 2017 or February 2018. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant admittedly purchased, possessed and used, marijuana; possessed and sold 
cocaine; violated a foreign country’s Cannabis Control Act and customs law; was arrested 
and charged with a variety of criminal violations; and lied on his e-QIP when he denied 
drug involvement and substance misuse during the last seven years when, in fact, he was 
still using marijuana. Because of his assault and battery charge of a family member in 
2016, he is still under advisement until July 2019, and he has not yet completed the court-
mandated requirements. In addition, while the SOR did not allege it, Applicant held an 
interim security clearance at some unspecified point between September 2016 (when he 
was still using marijuana) and February 2018.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and substance abuse; criminal conduct; and personal conduct. See SEAD 
4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.f.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. and 3.b.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                      
           __________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
