       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX. )  ISCR Case No. 18-01978 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 24 August 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 8 February 2019, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional documents. DOHA assigned the case to me 8 March 2019.
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-7.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) of Security Executive Agent
Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017. 
1
04/02/2019
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.l.  He is a 43-
year-old project manager employed by a U.S. defense contractor since February 2015.
He served honorably in the U.S. military from March 1995 to March 2015, when he
retired. He was recently divorced from his second wife (June 2018). They had two
children together before separating in April 2016. He seeks to retain the clearance
which was most recently renewed in February 2006 (GE 2).
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 2-7) substantiate, and Applicant
admits 11 delinquent debts totaling over $66,000 (SOR 1.b-1.k and 1.m). Applicant
denies SOR 1.l, which is established by Item 6. Applicant also admits having his house
foreclosed upon in November 2016 (SOR 1.a), filling for Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection in October 2015 (SOR 1.n), and having a state tax lien in March 2015 (SOR
1.o).3
Applicant reported filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on his November
2015 clearance application (Item 2). The October 2015 filing, listed $106,000 in
delinquent debt, and encompassed most of the SOR debts. Applicant discussed the
SOR debts during his October 2016 interview with a Government investigator (Item 3),
based on his November 2015 credit report (Item 4). The Chapter 13 petition had been
dismissed for non-payment in April 2016, when he and his wife separated.
Applicant’s December 2018 Answer (Item 1) enclosed copies of the final divorce
decree and supporting documents, and some records from a consumer credit
counseling organization. It also contained a September 2018 letter from Applicant’s
bankruptcy lawyer to Applicant’s ex-wife’s divorce lawyer, proposing that Applicant and
his ex-wife jointly file separate bankruptcy petitions to resolve their marital debt. The
divorce decree specifies that Applicant is responsible for most of the marital debt, and
his credit reports (Items 4-6) indicate that most of the debts are his individual accounts.
The record contains no indication whether or what response was received to Applicant’s
offer, which included Applicant paying for his ex-wife’s bankruptcy-filing expenses.
Applicant attributed their financial problems to his then-wife losing her teaching
job in 2011, and remaining unemployed until August 2015. They used their credit cards
to pay their ongoing living expenses. Yet, there is no evidence of any efforts undertaken
by her to regain employment or cut their living expenses during that time. When she
became re-employed, they tried Chapter 13 bankruptcy but that effort was overtaken,
and their finances further complicated, by their April 2016 separation. 
Applicant presumably received the credit counseling required as a precondition
for filing his bankruptcy petition in 2015. However, he provided no current budget or
The tax lien was due to Applicant’s then-wife settling some delinquent debts for less than the balance owed,3
thereby generating reportable income which they did not include on there 2014 state income tax return.
Applicant paid the lien as soon as he became aware of it.
2
financial statement to show that he is otherwise meeting his current living expenses.
Moreover, the fate of his contemplated bankruptcy filing remains unknown. A Chapter 7
discharge would give him a fresh start. A Chapter 13 plan would require a
demonstration of sufficient income to manage the plan payments. Finally, he provided
no work or character references, or any evidence of community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial
difficulties which date back to at least 2011. The financial problems were due to
Applicant’s wife losing her job in 2011 and were compounded by their separation in
2016. Nevertheless, Applicant has not explained his relative inaction on his finances
since his October 2016 interview with the Government investigator.5
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; (c) a history5
of not meeting financial obligations;
3
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations. 
His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, although his financial situation may 
be considered unlikely to recur.  Applicant’s financial problems were due to6
circumstances beyond his control; but it is debatable whether he dealt responsibly with
his delinquent debts.  Applicant documented no efforts between 2011, when his wife7
lost her job, to October 2015 when he first attempted bankruptcy, for his wife to find new
employment, or for them to try to reduce their living expenses. Moreover, bankruptcy
can be a legitimate and responsible means of addressing debt, but Applicant’s case
would be much stronger if his plans for a future bankruptcy had progressed beyond the
discussion stage with his ex-wife.
Applicant presumably received credit counseling as part of his unsuccessful 2015
bankruptcy petition, and is likely to receive it again if he files or has filed for bankruptcy
protection after his final decree, as contemplated. Yet now, his delinquent debts remain
in limbo. Thus, it is too soon to conclude that this debt was being resolved or under
control.  Similarly, it is too soon to establish that he has made a good-faith effort to8
address this debt.  Moreover, he provided no “whole person” evidence upon which I9
might base a favorable result. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline F against Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-n:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph o: For Applicant
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear8
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise9
resolve debts.
4
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                            
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
5
