1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00648 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 21, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 5, 2018 and October 9, 2018, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department 
04/01/2019
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant 
received it on January 15, 2019. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the 
FORM. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM or object to the Government’s documents. Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l, and denied the 
allegations in ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He attended college for approximately two years, but did 
not earn a degree. He married in 2014, and has a four-year-old child. He served in the 
Army Reserve from March 2006 to May 2016, and was honorably discharged. He has 
been employed by a federal contractor since February 2017.1  
 
In his June 2017 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), Applicant 
disclosed his work history and periods of unemployment: he worked part-time from 
February 2006 to April 2010, and was a drilling reservist from March 2006 to April 2010; 
active duty from April 2010 to February 2013; unemployed from February 2013 to April 
2014; active duty from April 2014 to May 2016; and unemployed from May 2016 to 
February 2017.2  
 
In Applicant’s response to Section 26 of his SF 86 that requested information about 
financial delinquencies, he disclosed one debt owed to a satellite television service in the 
amount of $173. He noted that it would be paid immediately. No other debts turned over 
to a collection agency, defaulted loans or debts that had been delinquent over 120 days 
or were currently over 120 days delinquent were disclosed.3  
 
In December 2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment after being discharged from 
the military. He took a job with a federal contractor working overseas so he could address 
those financial problems. He intended to pay all of his delinquent debts. In his answer to 
each debt alleged in the SOR, he stated: “I admit. However, the conditions occurred under 
unique such circumstances that are unlikely to recur and should not cast doubt on my 
current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment.”4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 2, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant further disclosed to the investigator that in February and March 2017, he 
was unable to pay his rent. His wife was working at the time, but he was not. Her income 
was insufficient. He arranged a payment plan with the landlord to pay the overdue rent.5  
 
Applicant disclosed to the investigator that in July 2014, he received notice that 
because he failed to return his apartment’s pool pass he owed $30. He was employed at 
this time, but his wife was not. He did not have the money to pay that debt. He was notified 
by mail in July 2014 that the debt was turned over to a collection company. He intended 
to pay the debt in January 2018. He told the investigator that he was now earning $85,000 
tax free while he was working in Kuwait. He forgot to list this debt when he completed his 
SF 86.6 
 
Applicant told the investigator that he owed approximately $18,000 to the DOD 
due to an overpayment made to him for a period of six months. He said that he was 
released from the military in May 2016, but he did not receive his official DD 214 discharge 
document until September 2016. He said he continued to receive pay from May 2016 to 
September 2016. He said he did not think anything of the fact that he was still receiving 
pay. After he received his DD 2014 the pay stopped. He said he thought this was normal.  
 
In January 2017, Applicant was notified by the Defense Financial and Accounting 
Service about the overpayment and informed that he owed $18,000. Applicant did not 
take action to repay this debt because he did not have the money. He told the investigator 
that he did not have the address to contact the creditor for this debt. He intended to obtain 
a copy of his credit report to obtain the information. He believed the debt may have been 
turned over to a collection company. He intended to repay the debt in full beginning in 
January 2018. He reiterated to the investigator that his current income was $85,000, and 
he planned to use his income to repay all of his debts. He failed to disclose this debt on 
his SF 86 because he forgot about it. (SOR ¶ 1.a-$17,655). Applicant did not provide 
evidence that he has made arrangements to repay this debt. 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($10,409), 1.c ($8,866), 1.d ($7,692) 1.e ($5,780) and 
1.h ($589) are credit card debts, and the debt in ¶ 1.g ($820) is owed to a furniture store. 
The debts were incurred while Applicant was unemployed from May 2016 to February 
2017. He used the credit cards to pay living expenses. During this period, Applicant was 
unable to pay the credit cards and furniture store. He told the investigator that the credit 
cards were in collections. He said he did not have a payment plan, and he could not afford 
to pay the debts. He planned to use his salary to repay the debts. He intended to obtain 
a credit report and start making payments on the debts in January 2018. He failed to 
                                                          
5 Item 4. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes any derogatory information that was not alleged 
in the SOR. I may consider information when making a credibility determination, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in my whole-person analysis. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
disclose these debts on his SF 86 because he forgot them. He did not provide any 
information about the status of these debts. They are unresolved.7 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($96) is a medical debt owed for services provided to 
Applicant’s daughter in May 2016. Applicant told the investigator he was unable to pay 
the debt when it was due. He said that it was still unresolved, but he would use his salary 
as a federal contractor to pay it. He did not provide evidence the debt is paid.  
 
Applicant was confronted by the investigator with the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($176); 
1.k ($1,464), and 1.l ($80). He said he was unfamiliar with these accounts. He told the 
investigator he would obtain a credit report and begin contacting creditors and establish 
payment plans.  
 
The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s 
admissions in his answer to the SOR, statements to the government investigator, and 
credit reports from July 2017 and February 2018.8  
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally failed to disclose on his June 2017 SF 86 
that he had debts turned over to a collection agency; had a credit card suspended, 
charged off, or canceled for failing to pay as agreed; in the past seven years had been 
over 120 days delinquent on any debt; or was currently over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt. His answer stated: “I used a credit report pulled that same day. However, I was 
unaware that the report was incomplete or inaccurate.”9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
                                                          
7 Item 4. 
 
8 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
9 Item 2.  
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
6 
 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $56,813 that are 
unresolved. He told the investigator he intended to pay the debts because he was now 
working for a federal contractor. No evidence was provided to show he has resolved any 
of the debts. There is sufficient evidence to establish the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has 12 delinquent debts that are unresolved. He attributed his financial 
problems to periods of unemployment. Despite telling the government investigator in 
December 2017 that he was now employed and would pay his delinquent debts, he failed 
to provide evidence that he has taken any action to resolve them. Applicant’s failure to 
pay his financial obligations casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s unemployment was beyond is control, but he failed to act responsibly 
after he obtained employment. Despite his promise to pay the delinquent debts after he 
started working, he failed to show he has taken action. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. There 
is no evidence he has participated in financial counseling, and there are no clear 
indications his financial problems are being resolved or under control. There is no 
evidence that he made good-faith efforts to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
I have considered that Applicant was an experienced military drilling reservist and 
served on active duty for two extended periods. Although he should have been aware 
that he was not eligible to receive pay when he was not serving, I am unable to conclude 
he knowingly and willfully accepted unearned pay from the DOD. I find in his favor for 
SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
Applicant was unemployed from May 2016 until February 2017, and used credit 
cards to pay his expenses that he could not afford to pay. He acknowledged to the 
investigator that he knew some of his accounts were in collection. He was notified in 
January 2017 that he was overpaid by the DOD, and he owed $18,000. He said he 
accepted a federal contractor job to work overseas so he could address his financial 
 
8 
 
 
problems. He said he forgot to list these debts on his SF 86. Applicant was aware he was 
not working and was using credit cards to pay expenses for a period of time. His 
explanation that he forgot about the delinquent debts he was required to disclose is not 
credible. I find he deliberately failed to disclose that he had delinquent debts and some 
that had been turned over to collection agencies or were currently past due more than 
120 days. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.b.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 17(a). There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his 
omissions prior to being confronted by the investigator.  
 
Applicant was aware he had numerous delinquent debts and deliberately failed to 
disclose them. The government relies on people to be forthcoming and honest on their 
SF 86, even when there is derogatory information in their history. AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply because Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose information on his SF 86 and 
certifying its accuracy are not minor offenses. I find Applicant’s omissions are serious and 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He experienced financial problems when he was 
unemployed. He told the government investigator that he was now employed by a federal 
contractor working overseas and his income was tax free. He intended to use his income 
to repay his delinquent debts. He failed to provide evidence that he has resolved any of 
the alleged delinquent debts. When Applicant completed his SF 86, he was aware he had 
debts that were in collections or delinquent, but he deliberately failed to disclose them. 
He has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
