 
 
 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-00903 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tod D. Stephens, Esq.
04/25/2019 
Decision
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case
On April 23, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 
(AG). 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on May 16, 2018, and she requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 28, 2019, and the hearing was
convened as scheduled on March 20, 2019. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
1
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
                                                          
  
 
  
 
  
exhibit list was identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through M, which were admitted without objection. The record remained 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. She submitted AE 
N through O, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 5, 2019. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with explanations. Her admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I
make the following additional findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She began working 
at her present job in approximately March 2018. From January 2016 to March 2018, she 
was a shift supervisor for corporate security. She is single, never married, and has no 
children. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009.1 
The SOR alleged Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in July 2015 and 
that the dischargeable debts were discharged in November 2015. The SOR also alleged 
four charged-off student loans totaling approximately $135,516. The allegations are 
supported by court documents showing the 2015 bankruptcy and credit reports from 
November 2017, April 2018, and March 2019 showing the delinquent student loans.
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e).2 
Applicant credibly explained that when she graduated from college in 2009 she 
had accumulated approximately $80,000 worth of student loans paying for her 
education. For some period after her graduation she was unemployed and 
underemployed because of the poor economy. Her loans were deferred during this time,
but they were incurring interest charges at rates between 15% and 19%. When she 
finally secured employment in her chosen field, her annual salary was approximately
$42,000 and her student loan amounts had risen to approximately $160,000. She could 
not afford to make the $2,000 monthly payments the credit holders were demanding. 
She sought to consolidate the loans, but the creditor refused. She was willing to pay her 
student loans, but she was unable to do so.3 
Applicant kept in contact with her student loan creditor, but she also sought
advice from an attorney. In 2015, she spoke with an attorney who advised her that she 
should file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy and include her student loans in the bankruptcy.
Applicant reluctantly followed this advice and included her student loans in her 
bankruptcy. Her total liabilities listed in the petition were approximately $181,000 and of
that amount approximately $161,000 were from her student loans. She had never been 
delinquent on her other debts listed in the bankruptcy before her attorney advised her to 
1 Tr. at 46-47, 19-21; GE 1; AE A.
2 GE 3-6.
3 Tr. at 21-22; Answer.
2
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 
 
 
 
  
 
stop paying them so they could be included in the bankruptcy. Her petition was granted 
and her debts were discharged except for her student loans which were non-
dischargeable in bankruptcy. Applicant was given incorrect advice by her attorney.4 
Applicant sought assistance from a second attorney who began negotiating with 
the student loan creditor in August 2017 about reaching a settlement. The creditor sued 
Applicant in state court, but those claims were all involuntarily dismissed by the judge in
August, October, and December 2018. Despite these dismissals, Applicant had her 
attorney purse settlement negotiations with the creditor. The settlement terms were 
reached in March 2019 and include Applicant paying a total of $30,000 through four
payments. Applicant documented that she completed her payments under the 
agreement. Applicant obtained these funds from her parents who recently won a $1 
million lottery. All her student loans are now resolved. Her March 2019 credit report 
shows no other delinquent debt.5 
Based upon Applicant’s recent personal financial statement, her financial affairs 
are in good order showing a monthly surplus of approximately $1,468. She received 
financial counseling through her bankruptcy, and more recently, as advised by her
second attorney. She also provided three character letters from two former coworkers 
and a personal friend. All attest to her honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness.6 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
4 Tr. at 23-25, 27; Answer; AE D-E. 
5 Tr. at 27, 29-31, 34; Answer; AE E-I, N-P. 
6 Tr. at 34; 37, 39; AE B-C, J-M.
3
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary  
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also  be  
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply:
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant accumulated student loans that became delinquent. She also filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2015. I find both the above disqualifying conditions are raised. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant funded her college education using student loans. Upon graduation,
she was unemployed and underemployed. Her student loans accumulated large interest
charges during this time. Applicant finally obtained employment in her career field, but 
by then her student loans had doubled in amount. She could not afford the payment 
plan her creditor demanded. She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition on the advice of
counsel who told her that the student loans would be discharged. That was incorrect 
advice. She continued to communicate with her creditor, through her new attorney, and 
reached a settlement agreement in March 2019. Her initial unemployment and 
underemployment and the bad legal advice she received concerning the effect of a
bankruptcy were conditions beyond her control and she acted responsibly by continuing 
to work out a settlement with her student loan creditor. She has received financial 
counseling and her current financial picture shows that she has control over her
finances. She initiated a good-faith effort to settle her student loans and followed-up by
making the negotiated payments. There are clear indications that her financial issues
are being resolved and that recurrence is unlikely. AG ¶¶ 20(a) - 20(d) are applicable.  
5
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to  
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service, and the circumstances 
surrounding her indebtedness. She has resolved her student loans and her current 
financial outlook is positive. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.   
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.e: For Applicant 
6
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
 
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Robert E. Coacher
Administrative Judge 
7
