     
     
 
______________
______________ 
     
   
  
      
    
  
  
  
     
 
    
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:
----------------------------------   
Applicant for Security Clearance 
) 
)
) 
) 
) 
 ISCR Case No. 18-02063 
Appearances 
For Government: Kelly M. Folks, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
04/24/2019 
 Decision 
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge: 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant did not mitigate security concerns regarding foreign influence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
History of Case 
On October 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the affirmative 
determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended (Directive); and by the Security 
Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4). 
   
   
      
  
   
    
    
   
  
 
  
 
     
   
  
   
    
 
      
   
    
      
    
    
   
    
     
         
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 6, 2018, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on February 12, 2018, and interposed no objections to the materials in the 
FORM. Applicant did not supplement the FORM with exhibits of his own. 
In its FORM materials, the Government requested administrative notice of facts 
detailed in 13 official source documents that are official Government publications. 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007). Administrative 
notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well known. See 
Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). For good cause shown, 
administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named official background 
reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Iraq. 
Administrative notice was extended to the requested facts and cited source 
documents, consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of the Federal Rules of Evidence. 
This notice did not foreclose consideration of information about the country not covered 
in the Government’s request for administrative notice, so as to ensure accurate and 
timely assessments of the country’s changing political landscape. 
Summary of Pleadings 
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged in the SOR to (a) own property in Iraq 
with an approximate value of $620,000; (b) have a stepmother who is a citizen and 
resident of Iraq; and (c) have in-laws who are citizens and residents of Iraq. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations without explanation.
Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a 48-year old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security 
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted 
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow. 
Background 
Applicant was born and raised in Iraq and immigrated to the United States in 
October 2009 on a refugee visa. (Items 1-3 and 5) In June 2015, Applicant became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and received a U.S. passport in July 2015. (Item 3) He acquired 
an Iraqi passport in August 2007 and surrendered it in August 2015 after becoming a 
U.S. citizen. (Item 3) While Applicant still holds Iraqi citizenship, he has expressed a 
willingness to renounce it. (Item 3) 
Applicant married in March 2003 and has three children from this marriage (ages 
14, 12, and 10). (Item 3) While the oldest two children were born in Iraq, the youngest 
2 
   
     
   
   
   
     
    
    
  
        
      
 
     
     
   
 
   
        
      
      
     
     
     
  
   
 
    
  
  
child was born in the United States. Applicant reported no educational information or 
active duty military service. (Item 3) 
Since June 2017, Applicant has worked as a linguist for a defense contractor. 
(Item 3) Previously, he worked for other non-defense employers in various jobs. He 
reported brief periods of unemployment in 2016 and 2009. (Item 3) 
Applicant’s family ties in Iraq 
Both of Applicant’s parents passed away: his father in 1984 and his mother in 
1993. (GE 3) Applicant has a stepmother, a mother-in-law and father-in-law, a sister-in-
law, and a brother-in-law who are citizens and residents of Iraq. He maintains monthly 
contact with his family members, and sometimes more frequently. (Items 3 and 5) Little 
is known about the backgrounds of his family members. His father-in-law is a retired 
member of the Iraqi Army. His rank, pension entitlements, and ties to other members 
past and present of the Iraqi Army are unknown. (Item 5) Based on information he 
provided in his OPM summary of interview in July 2017, one sister-in-law works for an 
Arab arbitration international center; while another sister-in-law works for an Arab 
embassy in Iraq. (Item 5) What affiliations and roles each sister-in-law plays in the 
identified Arab organizations is not reported in any of the exhibits in the record. (Item 5) 
Nothing about affiliations and associations of Applicant’s brother-in-law is reported in 
any of the exhibits. 
Applicant owns property in Iraq, which he purchased in 2007 for approximately 
$200,000. (Item 5) He purchased this property (a single family home) for himself, and 
his wife and children to live in when his work in the Iraqi American Green Zone ended. 
(Item 5) In 2012, he and his family occupied the home. Applicant estimated the value of 
the home at the time to be approximately $620,000. (Item 5) Currently, he values the 
home at just over $450,000. He hopes to sell the home when market conditions 
improve. (Item 5) But he could provide no clear estimates of when conditions will permit 
him to dispose of the property. (Item 5) 
Applicant comes from a family of considerable wealth. (Item 5) Before his 
passing, his grandfather acquired considerable wealth from building and operating an 
international trading business in Iraq. Since his grandfather’s death, Applicant’s relatives 
have managed his grandfather’s estate. (Item 5) Applicant has obtained some 
inheritance proceeds from his grandfather’s estate (approximately $45,000) and 
anticipates more to come once the estate winds down and distributions are made to 
qualified family beneficiaries. (Item 5)  
Iraq’s country status 
Iraq is a country with a population of 27 million that is broken down along ethnic 
and religious lines: Shiites, Sunni, Kurds and Turkoman comprise the predominant 
ethnic and sectarian groups.   Once known as Mesopotamia (the fertile crescent), Iraq is 
3 
   
          
  
    
      
      
    
     
  
    
  
       
     
      
   
     
  
     
  
    
  
   
   
 
   
  
    
    
     
      
   
    
  
bordered by Kuwait, Iran, Turkey, Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. See Background 
Note, Iraq, at 2-3, U.S. Dept. of State (Feb. 2008) At the end of World War I, Iraq 
became a British-mandated territory, and founding member of the Arab League. (id.) 
General Abdul Karim Qasim assumed power in a July 1958 coup and held power 
for five years before succumbing to the Ba’ath Party’s takeover of the Iraqi government, 
and Hasan al-Bakr’s selection as prime minister. See Background Note, Iraq, supra, at 
4. When Bakr resigned in 1979, Saddam  Hussein assumed the reigns of power. Under 
Saddam Hussein’s direction, Iraq launched a major invasion of its neighbor, Iran, in the 
1980s. See the World Factbook: Iraq, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (Feb. 2018); 
Background Note Iraq, supra. Iraq declared victory in 1988 and survived to claim the 
largest military establishment in the region. Iraq then turned its forces to mounted 
attacks against the ongoing Kurdish rebellion by Kurdish elements in the northern 
mountains of Iraq.  (Id.) 
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, and was repelled by a U.S.-led coalition in 
February 1991. See World Factbook: Iraq, supra; Background Note, Iraq, supra. After 
the war, the United Nations UN) Security Council required the Hussein regime to 
surrender to the coalition and submit to UN inspections. When the Ba’ath regime 
refused to fully comply, the Security Council invoked sanctions to prevent further 
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) development, and to enforce Iraq’s surrender 
terms.  Coalition forces employed limited no-fly zones in southern and northern Iraq and 
a limited no-drive zone in southern Iraq to prevent the regime from invading Kuwait 
again. (Id.) 
In 2003, A U.S.-led coalition invaded Iraq and succeeded in removing Saddam 
Hussein and his Ba’athist regime from military and political power. See The World 
Factbook: Iraq, supra;  Background Note Iraq, supra, at 3.  After two years of operations 
under a provisional authority, Iraq’s new government assumed office in March 2006 
(with the approval of the U.S. Government), following free elections. (id.) 
Notwithstanding the election of a new national government with U.S. backing, 
violence continued to envelop Iraq. This violence was fueled and perpetrated by Al 
Qieda terrorists, Sunni insurgents, and, Shiite militias and death squads. See The World 
Factbook: Iraq, supra; Background Note Iraq, supra. State Department reports 
document human rights abuses that include a “pervasive climate of violence, 
misappropriation of official authority by sectarian, criminal and insurgent groups; 
arbitrary deprivation of life, disappearances, torture and other cruel, inhumane or 
degrading treatment or punishment.” (Id.) 
Since March 2006, the Government of Iraq has been comprised of a broad 
coalition of political alliances representing the Shiite, Sunni and Kurdish blocs. See The 
World Factbook: Iraq, supra, at 2; Background Note Iraq, supra. at 8. While elections 
have been held, none of the key constituent groups have been able to form a 
government, adopt an oil law, establish and maintain effective security throughout the 
4 
   
     
     
    
   
   
   
      
     
    
      
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
    
     
    
 
   
     
    
 
    
   
provinces, or neutralize sectarian divisions. In this still very fragile political environment 
in Iraq, there are substantiated reports of human rights abuses that continue to 
underscore a still pervasive climate of tension and violence. 
Economic developments 
Iraq’s economy continues to be dominated by the oil sector, as it has for the past 
half century since the completion of new pipelines to Lebanon in 1949, and to Syria in 
1952. See The World Factbook: Iraq, supra; Background Note Iraq, supra. As a result 
of the U.S.-led invasion in 2003, much of Iraq’s oil-refining capabilities were shuttered. 
The rebuilding of oil infrastructure and utilities infrastructure has continued to expand 
since 2004 with U.S. aid and support, despite setbacks from insurgent activity. 
Proposed oil revenue-sharing legislation among the three war-hardened ethno-
sectarian divisions (Shia, Sunnis, and Kurds) still awaits passage after years of stalled 
negotiations, however, and at the moment, there are no good estimates of when such 
legislation will be approved and implemented. See Statement for the Record, Worldwide 
Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, U.S. Director of National 
Intelligence (Feb. 2018) For the foreseeable future, the national government can be 
expected to continue to seek the passage and implementation of a revenue sharing law 
to strengthen and encourage the development of this important sector. See id. 
Recent reports (although not official U.S. pronouncements) suggest that 
Baghdad is close to agreement with the semi-autonomous Kurdish regional government 
(KRG) to restart crude flowing from the Kirkuk oil fields as U.S. sanctions against Iran 
hit Iran’s energy sales. See Iraq Closing in on Deal to Resume Kirkuk Oil Exports, 
Reuters/Bloomberg (Nov. 2018). If these estimates prove to be accurate, they should be 
welcomed by both U.S. and allied Interests. 
Despite Iraq’s producing 4.3 million barrels of oil per day, according to published 
reports, Iraq’s population remains poor. See Putting Iraq-KRG Oil Relations on Solid 
Legal Ground, the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (July 2018). Currently, the 
case brought by the federal government of Iraq against the KRG in 2012 over the 
legality of the KRG’s oil contracts and independent exports remains pending with no 
disposition projected in the near future. See Id.
Past budget laws passed by Iraq’s national parliament requiring the KRG to 
contribute certain export earnings in the country’s overall exports (a law that would 
seem to legitimate the KRG’s ownership claims to Kirkuk oil) have never led federal 
authorities to export Kirkuk-produced oil. In so doing, Iraq’s federal authorities have 
severely limited Iraq’s northern export outlet via the Kurdish pipeline to Turkey. Breaking 
the oil-stalemate that existed for years between the KRG and Iraq’s federal government 
can have major positive ramifications for not only Iraq and its oil exports, but for the 
United States and other Western interests as well. 
5 
  
  
   
    
    
    
     
   
  
    
    
 
 
 
  
     
 
   
 
  
    
    
      
  
    
 
  
   
       
    
Terrorism and human rights issues 
Despite recent improvements in its security enforcement efforts, Iraq remains a 
very dangerous, volatile and unpredictable country. The U.S. State Department 
continues to strongly warn U.S. citizens against traveling to Iraq. See Travel Advisory-
Iraq, U.S. Dept. of State (Oct. 2018); Request for Administrative Notice, supra, a 3-4. 
The State Department assessed Baghdad as being a critical-threat location for crime 
directed at or affecting official U.S. interests. See Iraq 2018 Crime and Safety Report: 
Baghdad at 2-3. U.S. Dept. of State (Feb. 2018) While crime statistics and crime 
reporting mechanisms are incomplete and inconsistent, the vast majority of individuals 
under contract with, or employed by, the U.S. Government in Iraq are required to travel 
with a protective security detail, so as to limit potential criminal threats against them. 
(id.) 
Attacks against military and civilian targets throughout Iraq continue and include 
sites and facilities where foreign tourists frequently visit: hotels, restaurants, police 
stations, check points, foreign diplomatic missions, international organizations, and 
other locations with expatriate personnel. See Travel Advisory-Iraq, supra, and  Security 
Message: Expanded Temporary Movement Restriction, U.S. Department of State 
(December 2017) The U.S. Embassy’s ability to provide consular services to U.S. 
citizens outside Baghdad is extremely limited under the security environment that still 
exists in Iraq. See Country Information: Iraq: Safety and Security, U.S. Dept. of State 
(July 2017); Request for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4. 
The U.S. Government considers the potential security threats to U.S. government 
personnel in Iraq to be sufficiently serious to require them to live and work under strict 
security guidelines. See Country Information: Iraq: Safety and Security, supra; Request 
for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4. The U.S. Embassy’s ability to provide consular 
services to U.S. citizens outside of Baghdad is extremely limited under the security 
environment that exists in Iraq. See Country Information: Iraq: Safety and Security, U.S. 
Dept. of State (July 2017); Request for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4. 
Terrorist groups continue to mount attacks throughout Iraq and pose heightened 
risks to U.S. citizens and their family members residing in Iraq. See Country Reports on 
Terrorism 2016, U.S. Dept. of State (Sept. 2018); Request for Administrative Notice, 
supra at 3-4. The U.S. Government considers the potential personal security threats to 
U.S. Government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require ehem to live and 
work under strict security guidelines. 
To deal with expanded terrorist attacks against U.S. citizens in Iraq, the U.S. 
Embassy has expanded its temporary movement restrictions on Embassy personnel, 
both inside and outside the international zone, in response to the recent announcement 
that the United States recognizes Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. See Iraq 2018 
Crime and Safety Situation, supra; Security Message: Expanded Temporary Movement 
Restriction, supra, at 2-3; and Request for Administrative Notice, supra, at 4. 
6 
   
   
     
      
  
  
 
        
       
      
   
     
    
   
 
   
      
    
 
   
  
  
    
     
      
 
        
   
    
  
   
    
      
  
In December 2015, President Obama signed into law the Visa Waiver Program 
Improvement and Terrorist Travel Protection Act of 2015, which amended the existing 
Waiver Program. See H.R. 158 Visa Waiver Program Improvement and Terrorist Travel 
Protection Act of 2015, enacted as Public Law 114-113 (129 Stat, 2242), Dec. 18, 2015. 
Under the 2015 amendment, citizens of Iran, Iraq, Sudan, and Syria are ineligible to 
travel or be admitted to the United States under the Visa Waiver Program. See Request 
for Administrative Notice, supra, at 7 for additional coverage citation. 
Iraq’s human rights record remains a poor one. Based on the U.S. State 
Department’s most recent annual human rights report, violence continued throughout 
2017, largely fueled by the actions of the Islamic state in Iraq (ISIS). See Statement for 
the Record, Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, supra. 
After liberating all territory taken by ISIS by the end of 2017, Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) 
have continued to pursue and restrict ISIS forces still active in Iraq. 
Reports of human rights abuses include allegations of unlawful killings by some 
members of the ISF (particularly by some members of the Popular Mobilization Forces 
(PMF). Reports of human rights abuses also include allegations of unlawful killings, 
torture, harsh and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities, 
criminalization of libel and other limits on freedom of expression, widespread corruption, 
greatly reduced penalties for so-called honor killings, coerced or forced abortions 
imposed by ISIS on its victims, legal restrictions imposed on the freedom of movement 
of women, and trafficking in persons. See Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 
for 2017, U.S. Department of State (April 2018); Request for Administrative Notice, 
supra, at 5. 
Implications of the results of Iraq’s 2018 federal election on U.S. policy 
In May 2018, Iraq held its parliamentary elections that many believed would 
produce a new beginning for Iraq and foster progress in the country’s historically 
intractable issues covering such areas as endemic corruption, violent instability, and 
social/political polarization. See R. Alaaldin, What Iraq’s election Results Mean for U.S. 
Policy at 1-6, https://brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos (May 2018). This 
parliamentary election marks the first such federal election since the defeat of ISIS in 
December 2017 and was historic in many respects with over 7,000 candidates vying for 
329 seats. See The World Factbook: Iraq, supra and R. Alaaldin, What Iraq’s Election 
Results Mean for U.S. Policy, supra. 
Despite heavy media coverage and high hopes surrounding election prospects 
for the prime minister, al-Abadi failed to alleviate religious tension and develop a 
national consensus in Iraq on the importance of secular governance (only 44.5 percent 
of voting registrants, the lowest turnout since 2003), Iraq’s elections did, however, 
herald a new chapter for the victorious Sadrist movement headed by Shia cleric 
Muqtada al-Sadr and his millions of underclass followers. See See R. Alaaldin, What 
Iraq’s Election Results Mean for U.S. Policy, supra, at 1-6.. According to Brookings 
7 
  
     
   
 
 
    
  
     
      
  
   
 
       
       
     
    
     
  
       
 
    
     
   
 
   
        
   
  
 
  
   
    
   
    
    
reports, the Winner of the May 2018 election was al-Sadr’s al-Sa’iroohn coalition with 54 
seats, followed by the Fatah bloc, headed by Hadi al-Amiri who has reported close ties 
with Iran, with 47 seats, and the Nasr coalition, headed by al-Abadi with 42 seats. (id.) 
Election results were confirmed by Iraq’s top election body in June 2018 following a 
country-wide manual count, clearing the path for political parties to form a government. 
See  https://www.wsj.com (Aug. 9, 2018) 
While prospects for forming a government between the three principal coalitions 
are still uncertain, reported public statements about creating an alliance between al-
Sadr’s and al-Bati’s respective coalitions offer promise for Iraq in the wake of widely 
discredited elections. See F. Hassan and R. Nordland, Iraqi Political Alliance Unites a 
U.S. Friend and Foe, https://www.nytimes.com. And although these reports do not 
represent official U.S. pronouncements, they are illustrative of the major political 
changes that are gaining traction in Iraq and bear watching. 
Current U.S. Relations with Iraq 
The U.S. Mission in Iraq remains dedicated to building a strategic partnership 
with Iraq and the Iraqi people. See U.S. Relations with Iraq at 1-2, U.S. Dept. of State 
(July 2018). In coordination with the Global Coalition to defeat ISIS, the United States 
assisted Iraq’s efforts to achieve the long-sought goal of liberating all of Iraqi territory 
from ISIS. The Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) between Iraq and the United 
States provides the basis of the United States’s bilateral relationship with Iraq and 
covers a wide range of bilateral issues, including political relations and diplomacy, 
defense and security, trade and finance, energy, judicial and law enforcement issues, 
services, science, culture, education, and environment. (id.) 
U.S. bilateral assistance to Iraq is considerable and stresses economic reform, 
assistance to vulnerable groups, and democracy and governance. See U.S. Relations 
with Iraq, supra. U.S. security assistance supports the development of modern, 
accountable, fiscally sustainable, and professional Iraqi military resources capable of 
defending Iraq and its borders. 
The United States has designated Iraq as a beneficiary developing country under 
the Generalized System of Preferences program and has been proactive in the 
promotion of two-way trade between the United States and Iraq. (id, at 2) Noteworthy, 
Iraq’s re-integration into the international community has been marked by their 
demonstrated cooperation with international institutions, including the United Nations, 
International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and the Arab League. (id.) 
Policies 
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making 
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could 
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as 
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of 
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns if any. 
8 
    
     
    
   
     
    
    
      
    
   
   
   
       
       
   
     
     
  
   
     
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security 
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. Although, the guidelines do not 
require judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent 
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs, 
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense 
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the 
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a 
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about 
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be 
considered together with the following 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual 
guidelines are pertinent herein: 
Foreign Influence 
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not 
limited to, business, financial, and property interests, are a national security 
concern if they create circumstances in which the individual may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of 
foreign contacts or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
(see AG ¶ 6) 
Burden of Proof 
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to 
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a 
9 
  
   
      
    
     
     
   
 
    
    
  
    
   
    
     
    
 
     
   
  
      
     
  
  
  
 
     
   
   
     
     
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because 
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the 
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's 
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and 
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences 
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, 
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or 
conjecture. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial 
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that 
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or 
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not 
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually 
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security 
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted 
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security 
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the 
ultimate burden of demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis 
Applicant is a dual citizen of Iraq and the United States who has family 
members (a stepmother, in-laws, a sister-in-laws, and a brother-in-law) who are 
citizens and residents of Iraq. Security concerns are raised under the foreign influence 
guideline due to Applicant’s longstanding family ties to Iraq. 
Although Applicant’s contacts with his stepmother, in-laws, brother-in-law and 
sister-in-laws residing in Iraq appear to be modest (monthly and occasionally more 
often), they do involve close family members. And still not resolved are his property 
interests in Iraq that Applicant wants to sell when economic conditions improve. But to 
date, he is still holding the property. 
Conditions in Iraq raise heightened country risks as well. While Iraq is a 
liberated ally of the United States, it is a country that has encountered difficulty 
forming a government in the past and continues to experience ethno-sectarian 
10 
    
    
 
 
   
    
  
   
    
   
   
     
   
 
    
    
 
  
    
  
    
   
   
     
  
     
     
   
   
    
conflicts between principal factions and is considered a country with a poor human 
rights record and an unsafe country for U.S. citizens to visit by the U.S. State 
Department. 
Foreign influence concerns 
Key to the Government’s foreign influence concerns are Applicant’s extended 
family members (i.e., his stepmother, in-laws, sisters-in-law and brother-in-law) who 
are Iraqi citizens and still reside in Iraq, a country that is still in the process of 
establishing a stable democratic government able to protect all of its disparate 
constituent groups and maintain peace with its neighbors. Despite encouraging 
developments in Iraq following the federal elections of May 2018, Iraq is still a very 
dangerous and volatile country in certain sectors with an overall poor human rights 
record and heightened risks of terrorism in most sectors of the country. 
Applicant’s presumably close relationships with his extended family members 
residing in Iraq make them potentially vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive 
measures because of their close familial family ties with Applicant. Because the Iraq 
SFs and non-governmental entities (principally ISIS) operating in Iraq, as well as the 
former Iraqi military and intelligence authorities, have a history of violating Iraqi 
domestic laws and regulations, and international laws, they are more likely to use 
improper and/or illegal means to obtain classified information in Applicant’s 
possession or control through his siblings and in-laws. 
Noting that Applicant’s contacts with his Iraqi family members typically take 
place in potentially hostile security environs, the Government urges security concerns 
over risks that his telephonic contacts with his family members in Iraq might be subject 
to exploitation, coercion, or duress by Iraqi military and government authorities to 
access classified information in Applicant’s possession or control. Applicant’s activities 
warrant some application of two of the disqualifying conditions of the foreign influence 
guideline: DC ¶ 7(a), “contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
The citizenship/residence status of Applicant’s in-laws, stepmother, sisters-in-
law and brother-in-law in Iraq continue to pose potential concerns for Applicant 
because of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or 
classified information under Applicant’s possession and/or control. Applicant has no 
provided enough information about his family members to abate those concerns. 
Although none of Applicant’s family members in Iraq have any currently 
identified Iraqi military or government service, or other demonstrated links to the Iraqi 
government, they remain potentially vulnerable to pressure and coercion for so long 
11 
  
  
  
  
   
    
       
 
 
  
 
   
    
    
    
    
  
   
     
   
  
 
     
 
  
   
    
       
 
     
    
   
   
     
as they reside in Iraq (even in places considered to be generally safe from terrorist 
threats). Were any of these family members to be placed in a hostage situation, 
Applicant could be subject to conflicts over ensuring his family’s well being and 
protecting classified information. For this reason, DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign 
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or 
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information,” is applicable to the facts of this case. 
Applicable, too, to Applicant’s situation is DC ¶ 7(f), “substantial business, 
financial, or property interests in a foreign country, or in any foreign-operated business 
that could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation 
or personal conflict of interest.” Applicant’s reported property interest in Iraq is 
considerable (last reported to be worth $620,000 and currently estimated by Applicant 
to be worth at least $450,000 based on current market conditions). His valued 
property in Iraq is still held and maintained by Applicant and far exceeds any reported 
property he has in the United States. 
To be sure, none of Applicant’s stepmother, in-laws, sisters-in-law and brother 
in-law residing in Iraq have any history to date of being subjected to any coercion or 
influence. These historical antecedents limit the risk of any potential conflict situation. 
And while the absence of any past coercive measures taken by Iraqi authorities does 
not absolve Applicant from coercive risks in the future given Iraq’s checkered history 
of political instability, violence, hostage taking, and abusive measures taken against 
its own citizens. Despite the absence of any known evidence of pressure or coercion 
in their family history, the potential risk of a potential hostage situation with Applicant’s 
family members residing in Iraq is present. 
The AGs governing security clearances do not dictate per se results or 
mandate particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of foreign 
influence. What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country may not 
be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be weighed 
on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing. Personnel security 
assessments necessarily embrace similar risk assessments under the new AGs for 
assessing foreign influence risks and concerns associated with the individual's having 
family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of country risks and 
information available from public sources.
Mitigation is partially available to Applicant under the foreign influence guideline 
of the AGs. Based on his case-specific circumstances, mitigating condition (MC) ¶ 
8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
12 
       
 
   
     
   
  
  
     
   
       
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
    
    
   
   
  
   
       
    
     
               
government and the interests of the United States.” has some applicability to 
Applicant’s situation. Reports about Applicant’s family members residing in Iraq, as 
well as substantial property interests in the country, and little information available to 
assess their status and prospects for sale of the property in the foreseeable future, 
make it difficult to permit safe predictions about the future safety of Applicant’s family 
members and risk projections about his ability to protect his property interests against 
economic pressures brought to bear on Applicant by an Iraqi government interested in 
compromising Applicant to acquire classified and sensitive information from him. 
Of some benefit to Applicant, too, is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the group, government, 
or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s contributions to 
the U.S. defense effort are sufficiently demonstrated in this record to warrant partial 
application of MC ¶ 8(b). 
Still, heightened security risks associated with Applicant’s presumed close 
relationships with his family members residing in Iraq and continued ownership of 
significant property interests in the country cannot be safely discounted, though, 
considering all the facts and circumstances associated with his ties to Iraq. His family 
relationships and property interests in Iraq at this time are not fully reconcilable with 
his holding a security clearance. 
Whole-person assessment 
Whole-person assessment of Applicant’s foreign influence risks to ascertain 
whether they are fully compatible with eligibility requirements for holding a security 
clearance takes account of Applicant’s immigration to the United States on an asylum 
visa and his current employment as a linguist with the language skills he acquired in 
Iraq. Applicant’s value to U.S. security interests as a trained linguist is not sufficiently 
developed in this record to enable him to surmount security concerns over the 
heightened risks that his family members and property interest in Iraq present to U.S. 
security interests. Foreign influence concerns are not mitigated. 
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact, 
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following 
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance. 
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs  1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
13 
 
     
   
                                          
 Conclusions 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information.  Clearance is denied. 
Roger C. Wesley 
Administrative Judge 
14 
