KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a
case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful
error.  Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge
denying Applicant a security clearance is affirmed. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-02048.a1
DATE: 04/30/2019
DATE: April 30, 2019
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-02048
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 17, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 4, 2019, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Claude
Heiny denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Instead, it describes the reasons for her financial problems and her efforts to resolve them. 
Applicant  also indicates that she is required to hold a security clearance for her job.  The Directive,
however, does not permit us to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No.  14-02619 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2016). 
  
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale            
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
