1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01498 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Liam Apostol, Esq., Department Counsel 
Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on September 19, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 11, 
2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled on March 6, 2019.  
Evidence 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were 
admitted without objection. 
04/02/2019
 
2 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant both requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Iraq. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of 
the facts contained in the requests. The facts are summarized in the written requests 
and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is the significant 
threat of terrorism and ongoing human rights problems in Iraq. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for about four months. He is married for the second time. He has a 
child from his first marriage. He and his current wife have four children.1 
 
 Applicant was born in Iraq. His family moved to Kuwait when he was young for 
greater opportunities. Applicant was educated, including attendance at law school, in 
Kuwait. He was unable to complete his education, and his father was imprisoned in 
1990 after Iraq invaded Kuwait. His father was discriminated against because he was of 
Iraqi origins. The family moved back to Iraq in 1993. Applicant was unable to complete 
his education in Iraq because of the circumstances in that country.2 
 
 Applicant volunteered to work for the U.S. military in 2003. He worked under 
dangerous conditions in Iraq as a linguist for the U.S. military, coalition forces, and 
civilian government and reconstruction teams from 2003 to 2009. Because of that work, 
he was eligible for a special immigrant visa. He immigrated to the United States in 2009. 
His wife and children did not immigrate with him. He became a U.S. citizen in 2015.3 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. Applicant’s wife, five children, mother, seven 
siblings, in-laws, and extended family members are citizens and residents of Iraq. None 
of his family have visited him in the United States. With the exception of his siblings who 
are teachers, to his knowledge, none of his family members have any current 
connection to the Iraqi government or any terrorist organization.4 
 
 Applicant has been unable to bring his wife and their children to the United 
States because of financial reasons. He will work in Iraq as a linguist if he obtains a 
security clearance. He hopes to use the extra pay he will receive to finance their 
immigration to the United States. He credibly testified that his family in Iraq could not be 
used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified information.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 19-20, 25-26; GE 1; AE H. 
 
2 Tr. at 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B, E, F. 
 
3 Tr. at 15, 20-21, 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A-C, G. 
 
4 Tr. at 18, 31-34, 40, 45-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 18-21, 25, 34-36, 49-53; GE 1, 2; AE J, N. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters from members of the U.S. military and 
civilian coalition personnel attesting to his outstanding service as a linguist. He also 
submitted letters from people who have known him since he immigrated to the United 
States. He is praised for his diligence, responsibility, honesty, intelligence, 
dependability, trustworthiness, loyalty, professionalism, work ethic, leadership, 
reliability, dedication, integrity, and loyalty to the U.S. forces he supported.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
6 Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, M, P. 
 
4 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s wife, five children, mother, seven siblings, in-laws, and extended 
family members are citizens and residents of Iraq. The potential for terrorist violence 
against U.S. interests and citizens remains high in Iraq, and it continues to have human 
rights problems. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a 
 
5 
 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. The above disqualifying conditions have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following is potentially applicable:  
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Iraq. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that his family in Iraq 
could not be used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified information. The 
Appeal Board has stated that such a statement, standing alone, is of limited value, 
unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the 
past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of 
complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-
risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.7 
In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
6 
 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
Applicant worked under dangerous conditions as a linguist for the U.S. military, 
coalition forces, and civilian government and reconstruction teams in Iraq from 2003 to 
2009. He was heavily praised by members of the U.S. military and civilian personnel, 
which earned him a special immigrant visa. I find that Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is 
applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Iraq earned him high praise from U.S. 
military and civilian coalition personnel. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s 
proven record of action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to 
a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”8 The complicated state of 
affairs in Iraq places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that 
his foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that 
burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
