KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge, as the trier of fact, has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-00936.a1
DATE: 04/24/2019
DATE: April 24, 2019
In Re:
--------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-00936
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 25, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 12, 2019, after considering the record, Administrative Judge
John Bayard Glendon denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant, who is 30 years old, earned a bachelor’s degree in 2010.  After college, he
experienced periods of unemployment and underemployment.  In 2016, he began working for a
defense contractor.  The SOR alleged that Applicant had eight delinquent student loans with
balances that total over $65,000.  He admitted seven of those allegations.  In responding to the SOR,
he noted that he took a “hiatus” in his efforts to pay his debts when his wife was pursuing a graduate
degree.  Applicant provided documentation showing he made some payments on the student loans. 
In this regard, the Judge found:
Without a more detailed explanation from Applicant, I can only conclude that his
evidence is intended to show that he has made payments on two or possibly more of
his student loan debts, whether alleged in the SOR or not.  He presents this evidence
in support of his claim that he intends to continue paying these debts at this time and
intends to pay all remaining debts alleged in the SOR when he has more income
available to him in the future.1
Applicant presented a budget without any explanation that showed a monthly net family income of
about $7,781, expenses of about $5,099, and “Discretionary/Savings” of about $2,682.2  He also
provided a document reflecting a total debt of $114,560, which may reflect that he and his wife have
more student loan debts, and plan to pay them in three years.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant failed to address his delinquent student loans in any serious manner until he
received the SOR.  Upon graduating from college, he failed to develop a repayment plan.  These
circumstances were within his control, and he failed to act responsibly in addressing them.
1 Decision at 3.  
2 Decision at 3-4.  
2
Discussion
In his brief, Applicant does not challenge any of the Judge’s rulings or findings of fact.  He
challenges the Judge’s application of Mitigating Conditions 20(a)3 and 20(c).4  He contends that he
provided payment receipts for his “then active” debt accounts, but acknowledged that the account
numbers do not directly match those in the SOR because the debts have been passed through
collection agencies.  Appeal Brief at 1.  He also argues that he resumed making payments towards
the debts when his wife completed her graduate degree in 2018.  His arguments amount to a
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  As we stated in the past, the presence of
some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance
decision.  The Judge, as the trier of fact, has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether
the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00650 at
2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016).  Moreover, even if an applicant has actually paid his debts or is making
payments on them, a Judge may still consider the circumstances underlying the debts for what they
may reveal about the applicant’s worthiness for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at
3 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).  
 
Applicant has not established that the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
3 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(a) states, “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
4 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(c) states, “the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”
3
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale             
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
