 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01655 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 10, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and J. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 21, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on January 8, 
2019. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 14, 2019, scheduling the hearing for February 11, 2019. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was left open until March 11, 2019, for 
receipt of additional documentation. On February 21, 2019, Applicant offered one 
 
2 
 
document, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A and admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 26, 2019. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Pakistan. Department Counsel provided a six-page summary of the 
facts, supported by four Government documents pertaining to Pakistan, identified as GX 
4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. GX 1 at page 5.) He 
has been employed with the defense contractor since August of 2014. (GX 1 at page 
13.) He is married to a U.S. citizen. (GX 1 at pages 26~27.) Applicant was born in 
Dubai, lived in Pakistan when he “was 11 or 10” years old,” and has not visited Pakistan 
since then, and moved to the United States in 2003 as a twenty-year-old. (TR at page 
17 lines 4~14, and GX 1 at page 6.) He is well respected in the workplace, as attested 
to by his “Site . . . Manager.” (AppX A at page 2.) 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. Applicant’s 66-year-old mother is a citizen of Pakistan, but has lived in the 
United States since 2016. (TR at page 15 lines 13~14, at page 16 lines 1~21, at page 
30 lines 9~24, and at page 31 lines 17~20.) She works for a U.S. corporation, and is 
unaware that Applicant is applying for a security clearance. (Id.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s 40-year-old sister is a dual-citizen of Pakistan and Canada, and 
has lived in Canada since 2012. (TR at page 15 lines 19~21, at page 16 line 22 to page 
17 line 3, at page 18 lines 1~4, and at page 31 lines 17~20.) Like her mother, she is 
unaware that Applicant is applying for a security clearance. (Id.) 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
 2.a. and 2.b. In July of 2006, and again in September of 2006, more than twelve 
years ago, Applicant was involved domestic disputes with his newly-married wife. (TR at 
page 21 line 6 to page 27 line 16, and at page 28 line 22 to page 30 line 4.) As a result 
of both incidents he was charged, but the charges were subsequently dismissed. (Id.) 
He has attended anger management classes, and they both have attended “marriage 
conferences.” (TR at page 21 line 6 to page 27 line 16, at page 28 line 22 to page 30 
line 4, and AppX A at page 1.) They have been happily married “for over 12 years,” as 
 
3 
 
attested to by Applicant’s wife. (AppX A at page 1.) She avers that they “are devoted to 
one another and . . . are committed to make this marriage last.” (Id.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan. Pakistan is a federal republic, but the U.S. Department of State warns U.S. 
citizens not to travel to Pakistan due to terrorism. Pakistan has suffered numerous 
terrorist attacks. Pakistan has recently also had significant human rights issues.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology 
 
  Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens of Pakistan. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
  
 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest 
 
 Applicant’s mother lives in the United States and his sister in Canada. They have 
little knowledge of Applicant’s need for a security clearance. Their situs and lack of 
knowledge vis-à-vis Applicant do not raise a national security concern. Foreign 
Influence is found for Applicant. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
Applicant had two incidents involving domestic disputes in 2006. The evidence 
establishes the above two disqualifying conditions. 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
raised in this case: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 Sufficient time has passed since Applicant’s 2006 transgressions. He and his 
spouse have sought out and benefitted from marriage counseling. The evidence does 
establish mitigation under both of these conditions. Criminal Conduct is found for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2, the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant is respected by his Site 
Manager as an “outstanding employee.”  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence and Criminal Conduct security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
