 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05918 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 24, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on September 12, 2014, and reassigned to me on December 29, 2014. The case was 
scheduled and rescheduled several times before it was finally conducted on January 29, 
2015. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1.a through 6.g, 
which were admitted without objection. The record was held open until February 17, 
2015, for Applicant to submit additional information. He did not submit any additional 
documents. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 9, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 2002 until he was honorably discharged in 2011. He has 
worked for his current employer since 2011. He has an associate’s degree with 
additional college credits in pursuit of a bachelor’s degree. He is married with a two-
year-old child.1 
 
 Applicant joined the military in 2002 when he was 18 years old. Applicant’s father 
was dishonest and took advantage of his family. His father had personal information 
about his family, including their dates of birth and Social Security numbers. Applicant’s 
father lived in a state (State A) where Applicant never lived. Applicant’s brother moved 
to State A in 2002 to live with his father. While in State A, Applicant’s father opened 
accounts in Applicant’s aunt’s and grandmother’s names without their permission. He 
then did not pay the bills on those accounts. The house in State A was lost to 
foreclosure, and Applicant’s father and brother moved to State B, another state where 
Applicant never lived.2 
 
 Applicant’s father opened accounts in Applicant’s brother’s name and also in 
Applicant’s name without their authorization. Applicant’s brother saw mail addressed to 
Applicant at their home in State B. He confronted his father about why Applicant was 
receiving bills at their address, but his father could only give “impractical excuses.” 
Applicant first noticed fraudulent charges in his name in 2006 while he was stationed 
overseas. He decided to cut ties with his father. His father passed away in October 
2014. Applicant had little contact with his brother because he was living with his father, 
but they reconnected after their father’s death.3 
 
 The extent of the father’s criminal activities was not discovered until after his 
death. That is when Applicant’s brother discovered his father opened accounts in his 
name. He also discovered documents with Applicant’s name on them. He provided the 
information and documents to Applicant and also wrote a letter attesting to the above. 
Applicant’s father’s address and three other addresses in the city where Applicant’s 
father lived are listed as addresses on Applicant’s credit reports.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 74-77; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-18; GE 1-3; AE 1.a, 1.b. 
 
3 Tr. at 16-17, 83; GE 1-3; AE 1.a, 1.b. 
 
4 Tr. at 16-18; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-8; AE 1.a, 1.b, 2, 4.a-6.g. 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts with balances totaling about $12,500. The 
debts are all listed on at least one credit report. SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,084 debt to a 
telecommunications company) and SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,195 debt to a collection company on 
behalf of the same telecommunications company) are duplicate accounts. SOR ¶ 1.a 
(alleged as a $1,843 medical debt) and SOR ¶ 1.f (alleged as a $1,831 debt to a 
collection company on behalf of a “payday” loan company) are also duplicate accounts. 
See discussion below. When duplicate accounts are omitted, there are eight debts 
totaling about $9,620. Applicant denied owing all the debts. He believes that most of the 
debts were opened by his father without his authorization.5 
 
 Applicant’s brother provided copies of statements and collection notices that he 
found in his father’s file cabinet. The documents had Applicant’s name with his father’s 
address. Several of the documents relate to debts alleged in the SOR. In 2006, 
Applicant’s father opened an account in Applicant’s name with the telecommunications 
company identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i. Applicant disputed the debt with the credit 
reporting agencies. Equifax deleted the debt noting: “We have researched the collection 
account. Account # [-------] The results are: This item has been deleted from the credit 
file.”6 
 
 Applicant’s brother provided an April 2007 collection notice from the collection 
company handling the $499 debt to the cable television provider identified in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
Applicant’s name was on the notice. The address that received the service was in the 
city where Applicant’s father lived. The collection notice for $474 went to Applicant’s 
father’s street. The street numbers on the collection notices provided by Applicant’s 
brother vary slightly. This was possibly intentional on his father’s part to throw off the 
collection companies. Applicant disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies. 
Equifax deleted the account noting: “We have researched the collection account. 
Account # [--------] The results are: This item has been deleted from the credit file.” 
TransUnion also deleted the account after an investigation.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $155 debt to a collection company on behalf of a satellite 
television provider. Applicant’s brother provided a February 2007 bill from the satellite 
television provider in Applicant’s name sent to his father’s address. The $318 bill noted 
the company did not receive payment for their last month’s statement. The debt is not 
listed on Applicant’s most recent credit report.8 
 
 In February 2010, the law firm handling the $535 debt to a bank (SOR ¶ 1.j) sent 
a collection notice in Applicant’s name to his father’s address. In July 2010, the 
collection company handling the same debt sent a collection notice in Applicant’s name 
                                                          
5 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-8; AE 1.a. 
 
6 Tr. at 16, 69; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE 1.a, 5.b. 
 
7 Tr. at 67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8; AE 1.a, 4.c, 5.b. 
 
8 Tr. at 68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8; AE 1.a, 2. 
 
 
4 
 
to his father’s address. The debt was transferred to a collection company. The collection 
company later reported the debt as paid.9 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($1,945) and 1.g ($1,204) allege debts to utility companies that are 
located in State B where Applicant’s father lived. Applicant never lived in that state. 
Applicant’s brother told him that his father had a large utility bill because he was 
growing marijuana. The debts are not listed on the most recent credit report.10 
 
 Applicant denied owing the remaining three debts, but none of the debts can be 
tied to his father. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $1,843 medical debt. The creditor is unidentified.  
A credit report from April 2014 lists the debt as having a date of last action of 
September 2007. It is unlikely that Applicant would have a medical debt from that period 
because he was on active duty in the military, and he did not have any dependents at 
that time. All his medical expenses were paid by the U.S. Government. The debt is not 
listed on the most recent credit report.11  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $1,831 debt to a collection company on behalf of a payday 
loan company. Applicant admitted borrowing money from the company, but he stated 
that he paid the loan. The March 2012 combined credit report lists the debt as reported 
by all three credit agencies with a date of last activity of September 2007. The debt is 
not listed on the September 2013 and April 2014 Equifax credit reports. Both credit 
reports list a medical debt of $1,843 (SOR ¶ 1.a) with the same six-digit account number 
as the payday loan debt.12 A creditor is not identified in the reports. I conclude the two 
debts are duplicate accounts. Neither debt is listed on the most recent credit report.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $2,244 debt to a collection company on behalf of an 
apartment complex. The March 2012 combined credit report lists the debt as reported 
by all three credit agencies with a date of last activity of October 2007. Applicant 
admitted living in the apartment, but he denied that he vacated the apartment owing any 
rent or damages. Applicant disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies. Equifax 
deleted the debt noting: “We have researched the collection account. Account # [-------] 
The results are: This item has been deleted from the credit file.” TransUnion also 
deleted the account after an investigation.14 
 
 Applicant was forthright and credible about his finances and his father’s actions. 
Applicant paid several debts not alleged in the SOR that he admitted were his 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 55-58, 62-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8; AE 1.a. 
 
10 Tr. at 18-21, 67-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1 5-8; AE 2. 
 
11 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8; AE 2. 
 
12 The chance of two unrelated accounts having the same six-digit account number is literally one in a 
million. 
 
13 Tr. at 26-29, 47-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8; AE 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 22-26, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5-8; AE 4.c, 5.b. 
 
5 
 
responsibility. He has been disputing the fraudulent and inaccurate entries on his credit 
report for several years. He retained the services of a law firm to assist him in disputing 
the debts. The only debt alleged in the SOR that is listed on Applicant’s most recent 
credit report is the one that was paid. Other than the issues addressed above, 
Applicant’s finances are sound. He has an important job that pays a good salary. His 
wife works. They earn enough to pay their bills and save for emergencies, their child’s 
college fund, and their retirement. He has the funds to pay the alleged debts, and he 
stated that he would pay them if he discovered they were his responsibility. He has not 
received formal financial counseling, but he reads financial books and materials.15 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 18-21, 28-30, 37-41, 45-46, 49-55, 69-74, 77-79; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE 2-
6.a. 
 
 
6 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are listed on credit reports. Credit 
reports are generally sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case of 
Guideline F security concerns. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
5, 2012). AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) have been raised by the Government’s prima facie 
case. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
7 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant provided compelling evidence that his father opened accounts in his 
name without his authorization. Six of the eight non-duplicative debts alleged in the 
SOR are attributable to his father, and one of those was paid. Two of the debts were not 
connected to his father. Applicant credibly testified that he did not believe he owed the 
debts, but he would pay them if he discovered they were his responsibility. All debts 
were disputed, and the only debt alleged in the SOR that is listed on Applicant’s most 
recent credit report is the one that was paid. All of the above mitigating conditions are 
applicable. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant’s criminal father created financial problems for his entire family. It took 
Applicant years to get out from under the financial quagmire created by his father. 
Applicant’s current finances are sound. He has an important job that pays a good 
salary. He is taking steps to provide for his family’s future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
