1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 12-07878
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William J. Bainbridge, Esquire
March 9, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
Synopsis
Applicant took one puff of a marijuana cigarette on one occasion in 2011, while
holding a security clearance. With the exception of when he was a Freshman in college
in 1996, this was the only other time that he ever used an illegal drug, and he self-
reported it on his Security Clearance Application. He credibly testified and submitted a
personal statement, stating that he did not intend to use any illegal substance in the
future. Mitigation has been shown. Clearance is granted.
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On July 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on August 7, 2014, and he
requested that his case be decided by a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The
case was initially assigned to another Administrative Judge on December 29, 2014, and
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on that date. I received the case assignment on
January 12, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled on January 23, 2015. At
the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits A through C,
which were also admitted without objection. Two additional witnesses testified on behalf
of Applicant. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on February 2, 2015.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant and the
two additional witnesses, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted the one SOR allegation, 1.a. The admitted
allegation is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as reviewed
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following additional
findings of fact: 
Applicant is 36 years old. He is married, and he and his wife have one child with
another one due shortly. Applicant received a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics in
2001. Applicant has been employed on a full-time basis by his present employer, a
defense contractor, since 2001, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection
with employment in the defense sector.  (Tr at 50-54.) 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The SOR lists one allegation (1.a.) under Adjudicative Guideline H. 
1.a. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he, “used
marijuana in April 2011, after being granted a Department of Defense Security
Clearance.” At the hearing, Applicant testified that in April 2011 he was at an outdoor
music concert with some friends. Between acts at the concert some other
acquaintances met up with Applicant and his friends. One of the individuals had a
marijuana cigarette, and he offered it to the other people including Applicant. Applicant
testified that he took one puff of the marijuana cigarette without really thinking about it,
but after he took the drag, he thought to himself, “that was pretty stupid.” When it was
offered to him a second time, he declined to use the marijuana again. (Tr at 54-58, 64.)  
Applicant conceded that he had also experimented with marijuana in 1996 or
1997, for one or two months when he was a Freshman in college. He estimated that he
used it fewer than 10 times, After that brief period, he decided that he did not like
associating with the people who used marijuana at school, and he never used marijuana
again until the one occasion in April 2011. Applicant also testified that he never used
any other illegal drug except marijuana. (Tr at 58- 63.) 
3
Applicant testified credibly that he never used marijuana after that one occasion
in April 2011. He also testified that he does not associate with any drug users, he
intends never to use any illegal drug in the future. He explained that he could be sure he
would never partake of an illegal substance in the future because of how important his
wife and soon to be two children are to him, and he would never do anything in the
future that would jeopardize their security or safety, nor would he want to jeopardize his
security clearance in the future. (Tr at 54-58, 64-66.)  
Applicant testified that he voluntarily revealed to the Government that he had
used marijuana upon his own volition. He revealed his college usage on his first
Security Clearance Application (SCA), and he revealed his 2011 marijuana usage on an
updated SCA. (Tr at 58, 63.)
Applicant submitted a sworn statement signed by him under penalty of perjury, in
which he wrote, “It is my firm intention to not use any narcotic, depressant, stimulant,
hallucinogen (Including LSD and/or PCP), cannabis (Including marijuana and/or
hashish). It is also my firm intention to not use any prescription drug without a valid
prescription, misuse a drug prescribed to me, and/or misuse any over-the-counter
medication in a manner for which it is not intended. I understand and agree that any
violation of the forgoing will result in the automatic revocation of my clearance.” (Exhibit
C; Tab A.) 
Mitigation
As discussed above, two witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. The first
witness has known Applicant for nine years both at work and socially. She was informed
by Applicant that “four years ago, he took a hit off a joint at a concert.” The witness
testified that Applicant was “very remorseful [and] he recognizes that it was a mistake.”
Applicant expressed to the witness that he does not intend to use drugs in the future,
and based on her knowledge of Applicant, the witness was confident that Applicant
would be successful. (Tr at 20-34.) The second witness, who also knows Applicant from
his employment and socially, also became aware of Applicant’s one time use of
marijuana. He was confident that Applicant would not use any drug in the future.  (Tr at
36-42.)   
Additionally, Applicant submitted his Performance Evaluations from 2001 through
2013. (Exhibit A; Tabs A through M.) His evaluations have all been excellent, and his
2013 Performance Rating was “Far Exceeds Requirements.”
Finally, Applicant submitted two extremely positive and laudatory character
letters from individuals who know Applicant professionally. (Exhibit C; Tabs B and C.)
He was described by an individual who is aware of Applicant’s brief drug usage, “as a
very responsible, hard-working, and conscientious person.” The witness also wrote, “I
know [Applicant] now recognizes and regrets his mistake and I believe him when he
says he will never get involved with drugs again.”   
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG ¶ 24:  
      Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgement and because it raises questions about a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, specifically the use of marijuana as recently
as April 2011, while he was holding a security clearance, is of great concern, especially
in light of his continued desire to have access to the nation's secrets. Applicant's overall
conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls within Drug Involvement ¶
25(a) “any drug abuse,” and (c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation,
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution.” ¶ 25(g) is also applicable
because of Applicant’s “illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.”
However, I find credible his testimony and his written statement that he intends to
abstain from using marijuana or any illegal drug in the future. I also considered that with
the exception of brief usage in 1996 or 1997, Applicant used an illegal drug on only one
occasion and that was almost four years ago. I also considered Applicant’s honesty in
revealing his drug usage to the Government on SCAs that he completed. Finally, I
considered the positive and laudatory testimony of the two witnesses and the character
letters, which make Applicant’s stated intentions to never use illegal drugs again more
credible and convincing.  Therefore, I conclude that ¶ 26(a) is applicable since “the
behavior . . . was so infrequent” and “happened under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur.”  Also, ¶ 26(b) “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future,” including (3) “an appropriate period of abstinence,” and (4) “a signed statement
of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation,” is applicable and
mitigating.
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has used illegal drugs under Guideline H. Applicant, on the other hand, has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation, which is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case against him.  Accordingly, Guideline H of the SOR is
concluded for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating conditions are applicable and controlling, I find that the
record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
