KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant was not denied an opportunity to present evidence, nor was he denied any
other aspect of due process afforded by the Directive.  Applicant has failed to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  A different
interpretation of the evidence is not enough to show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-02596.a1
DATE: 03/12/2015
DATE: March 12, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-02596
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Geoffrey C. Hengerer, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
4, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On December 10, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge denied Applicant due
process and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since 2010.  He has been continuously
employed since 2004.  He has a Master’s Degree and has held a security clearance since 2004 with
no security incidents.
Applicant bought a house in 2004 for $252,000 with a 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage.  He
refinanced in 2008 for a total amount of $360,000.  He financed with a variable first mortgage of
$252,000 and a home equity line of credit for $112,000 for the second mortgage.  He did not
withdraw cash from the refinance to use for another purpose.  He initially testified that he intended
to sell it “at the top of the market.”  Decision at 3.  Later, however, he testified that he did not know
why he refinanced the house.  His total monthly payments increased, and then, in 2008, the real
estate market crashed.  This, plus a loss of income due to a pay cut, caused him to sell the house.
He engaged in a short sale, resulting in a satisfaction of the first mortgage and a payment of
$2,000 to the creditor of the home equity loan.  This creditor would not forgive the remainder of the
debt.  Applicant claimed that he had approached the creditor about a payment plan, but he did not
corroborate this claim.  He stated that the creditor told him that the account was charged-off and that
he owed nothing.  After receiving the SOR, he got in touch with the creditor, who sent a letter
stating that the account was closed.  The letter stated that “this account is uncollectible and closed
with a zero balance as of 4/18/2013.”  Id. at 4.
Applicant has never had financial counseling.  A credit report submitted by Applicant has
two missing pages that, apparently, identify collection accounts.  The Judge stated that it is not
possible to determine if these are the same accounts as ones listed in Government reports.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for the quality of his work.  He provided a letter from an
employee of another Government agency attesting to his contributions to mission accomplishment.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that it was not obvious why Applicant refinanced his home, since most
people do that in order to reduce their interest rate or to convert equity to cash, and Applicant’s
venture did neither.  He concluded that Applicant’s inability to explain why he refinanced under
such terms impaired his credibility and raised doubts about his reliability and judgment.  Noting
evidence of circumstances outside Applicant’s control that affected his financial problems, such as
the crash of the real estate market, the Judge stated that Applicant was entitled to some credit for
having engaged in a short sale of his home.  However, the Judge also noted that Applicant did not
corroborate his testimony about having negotiated with the creditor of the equity line of credit.  He
also cited to evidence that the creditor had charged off the debt and that it was not collectible.  The
1“[Judge]: Sir, do you have any additional testimony you wish to provide, perhaps in response to [Department
Counsel’s] questions , or perhaps in . . . another area?  It’s up to you.  Testimony.  Not a closing statement.  Testimony.
[Applicant]: Yes.  I think that the inquiry in to my financial business–let me start over.  I am financially sound.  I take
care of my family. [Judge]: Okay.  That’s a closing statement. [Applicant]: Okay.”  Tr. at 33.
3
Judge was not able to conclude that Applicant had made a good faith effort to pay the debt rather
than merely rely on evidence that the creditor may have given up on collecting it.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s educational attainments, his clean
security record, and his good work performance.  However, he also noted Applicant’s inability
clearly to explain why he refinanced his house under terms that were not favorable to him.  He stated
that Applicant had not provided sufficient evidence to show that the home equity loan had actually
been resolved in his favor.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge cut him off during his testimony, denying him an opportunity
to present the full measure of his favorable evidence.  We have examined the portion of the
transcript that Applicant cites.  The Judge gave Applicant an opportunity to provide additional
testimony, but he characterized Applicant’s comments as argument, to be reserved until the end of
the hearing.  We find nothing in this to persuade a reasonable person that the Judge denied Applicant
an opportunity to present evidence in mitigation.1  In any event, Applicant has not cited to any
evidence that he would have presented but for the Judge’s alleged curtailment of his testimony.
Therefore, his argument fails for lack of specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00281 at 3 (App.
Bd. Dec. 30, 2014).  An examination of the entire transcript discloses no reason to believe that
Applicant was denied the due process afforded him by the Directive.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly evaluate the mitigating conditions.  He
argues, among other things, that he has done all that he can to resolve his financial problems in light
of his entire circumstances.  He states that the Judge has not identified anything else he could have
done to satisfy the delinquent home equity loan.  Although debt resolution is a factor to be
considered in evaluating an applicant’s financial condition, a Judge may legitimately evaluate other
things, such as the circumstances underlying a debt that impugn an applicant’s judgment.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 10-06975 at 2  (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2012).  In this case, Applicant’s inability to provide
a cogent reason for his having refinanced under such apparently unfavorable terms was evidence of
this sort.  In addition, evidence that the debt has become legally uncollectible does not in and of
itself show that Applicant resolved it in a manner that would mitigate the concerns raised in the
SOR.  See, e.,g., ISCR Case No. 10-03656 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 19, 2011).   Therefore, the record does
not support Applicant’s argument that he has clearly done all that he could have to satisfy the
delinquency at issue in this case.
Applicant’s citation to favorable evidence is not sufficient to show that the Judge failed to
consider all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28,
2014).  Applicant’s brief, in essence, argues for a different interpretation of the evidence, which is
4
not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00173 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2014). 
   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
