 Exhibit 5. 1
 Exhibit 4 (for ease of reading, it will be referred to as a security clearance application or simply an2
application).  
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-10555
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 52-year-old engineer, Applicant has taken
sufficient action to address and overcome the security concerns stemming from two
alcohol-related incidents resulting in misdemeanor criminal convictions in 1986 and
2012. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
In August 2012, Applicant self-reported to security officials that he was arrested
and charged for driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol in May 2012.  Thereafter,1
on June 6, 2013, Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National
Security Positions (SF 86 Format).  After reviewing the application and information2
 The DOD CAF, Fort Meade, Maryland, is a separate and distinct organization from the Defense Office of3
Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington,
Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,4
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 5
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some6
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board7
restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
2
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF),  on September 24, 2014, sent Applicant a statement3
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a4
complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as
Guideline G for alcohol consumption and Guideline J for criminal conduct. Applicant
answered the SOR on October 21, 2014. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.5
On December 24, 2014, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material
information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant material6
(FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it January 12, 2015. Applicant replied to
the FORM by submitting a two-page memorandum, which is admitted without objections
as Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me March 11, 2015.   
Rulings on Evidence 
Exhibit 6 is an undated set of interrogatories the DOD CAF issued to Applicant,
likely sometime before issuance of the SOR. The interrogatories sought information
from Applicant about financial matters, alcohol consumption, criminal conduct, and
asked him to review and verify the accuracy of a summary of an interview in June 2013.
The summary is contained in a report of investigation (ROI) from the background
investigation of Applicant. 
An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is authenticated by
a witness.  It appears Applicant did so by answering the interrogatories, but the exhibit7
is missing important information. Omitted from Exhibit 6 is the signature page, which
would presumably be labeled page 9, the last page of the interrogatories. Omission of
the signature page is a serious flaw, because without it, there is no proof that Applicant
 Exhibit 4. 8
 Exhibit 4. 9
 Answer to SOR. 10
 Exhibit 7. 11
 Exhibit A. 12
 Exhibit 7. 13
3
actually signed-off on his answers to the interrogatories. Accordingly, Exhibit 6 is not
admitted, and it will not be considered for any purpose. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant attached a letter from a counselor with the
outpatient program he is attending. It is my practice to detach such matters from the
answer and admit it as an evidentiary exhibit. Accordingly, the letter is admitted as
Exhibit B. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security
clearance. His educational background includes a master’s degree. He has worked for
federal contractors in the defense industry since at least 1999, and he has worked for
his current employer since 2005 as a propulsion staff engineer.    8
The undisputed evidence shows Applicant has two alcohol-related incidents
resulting in misdemeanor criminal convictions in 1986 and 2012. In addition to his self-
report of the 2012 incident, mentioned above, he disclosed both incidents in his June
2013 security clearance application.  9
Applicant admits consuming alcohol over the course of his adulthood, but he
denies drinking to the point of intoxication was a common occurrence.  There is no10
evidence that he has received a diagnosis of alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse. In
2003, he described himself as a social as opposed to a habitual drinker who had two
cocktails or glasses of wine twice a week, usually on the weekend while having dinner.11
In his 2015 response to the FORM, he described his history of alcohol consumption as
moderate.12
Applicant pleaded no contest to a DUI offense stemming from his arrest in
November 1986. He was driving home after an evening out with his then girlfriend after
drinking four or five cocktails over a three-hour period.  He was stopped by the highway13
patrol for driving aggressively. The state court sentenced him to pay a $700 fine, to
attend an alcohol-education class, and his driver’s license was restricted to driving to
and from work for three to six months.
 Exhibit 8.14
 Answer to SOR. 15
 Exhibit A. 16
 Answer to SOR; Exhibit B. 17
 Exhibit B. 18
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to19
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
Applicant was charged with two counts of DUI stemming from his arrest in May
2012, and he pleaded guilty to a single offense for having a blood-alcohol content above
0.08%.  The other DUI offense was dismissed. In August 2012, the state court14
sentenced him to serve five days in jail, to attend DUI school for nine months, and to
serve probation for three years, although he served the jail time by performing
community service.  He described the probation as unsupervised, because he is not15
required to report to a probation officer or other court official.  There is no evidence that16
Applicant has violated the terms of his probation, which will conclude in August 2015. 
In July 2014, which was a few months before issuance of the SOR, Applicant
decided to stop drinking and abstain from alcohol, and he self-enrolled in an outpatient
alcohol-treatment program.  He attends the program regularly, and he also attends17
meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). He is making progress in the program as
verified in a letter from his counselor:
[Applicant] has been attending and participating in groups on a regular
basis since July 17  and has made much progress while in treatment.th
[Applicant] not only acknowledges that he has a substance abuse issue
but has taken action to maintain sobriety. [He] seeks extra support at
outside support groups as well as coming to outpatient treatment. He
meets with myself, his substance abuse counselor, once a week and
completes his assignments on time and thoroughly. In my professional
opinion, [he] shows great promise in continuing his recovery and is a great
example to the other clients at the program.    18
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he accepts full responsibility for
the two alcohol-related incidents, and he is taking action, via the outpatient program, to
address his drinking and eliminate any further incidents of DUI or other alcohol-related
incidents.
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As19
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
 484 U.S. at 531.20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 22
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.26
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 27
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).28
5
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt20
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An21
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  22
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting23
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An24
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate25
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme26
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.27
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.28
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.29
 AG ¶¶ 21, 22, and 23 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).30
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 31
6
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it29
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The alcohol consumption and criminal conduct concerns are discussed together
because they are factually interrelated. Under Guideline G for alcohol consumption,30
the concern is that excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or failure to control impulses, and it can raise questions about a
person’s reliability and trustworthiness. Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the31
concern is that criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness, and calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to follow laws,
rules, and regulations.
Based on the evidence, I have considered the following Guideline G and
Guideline J disqualifying conditions:
AG ¶ 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while
under the influence, . . . ;
AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted; and
AG ¶ 31(d) individual is currently on parole or probation.
  Likewise, both guidelines contain conditions that may mitigate security concerns.
Based on the evidence, I have considered the following Guideline G and Guideline J
mitigating conditions:
AG ¶ 23(b) the [person] acknowledges [their] alcoholism or issues of
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this
 AG ¶ 2(e)(1)–(6). 32
7
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
AG ¶ 23(c) the [person] is a current employee who is participating in a
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment
record, or constructive community service.
Applicant was a problem drinker. This is rather obvious in light of the two alcohol-
related incidents resulting in misdemeanor criminal convictions in 1986 and 2012. Those
two incidents are persuasive evidence that Applicant occasionally abused alcohol and
then exercised very poor judgment by deciding to drive a car after drinking. The two
incidents occurred more than 25 years apart and do not necessarily indicate a pattern
(although three or more such incidents certainly would). Nonetheless, the two incidents
are serious and of concern, because they demonstrate that Applicant failed to learn his
lesson after the 1986 DUI offense. And he is on probation for another six months due to
the 2012 DUI offense. 
In mitigation, I am persuaded that Applicant has taken sufficient action to address
and overcome the security concerns stemming from two alcohol-related incidents
resulting in criminal convictions. The primary or most persuasive evidence in support of
that conclusion is that he initiated action in July 2014 to address his drinking by enrolling
in an outpatient program, and he has since been alcohol-free. According to his
counselor at the program, he is making satisfactory progress, he is a good example for
others in the program, and he shows great promise. Although he is currently on
unsupervised probation, he has served about 80% of the probation without incident, and
he is on course to complete the remainder within the next six months. His continued
participation in the outpatient program provides assurance that he will remain alcohol-
free and not violate his probation.   
In addition to the mitigating conditions, I also gave Applicant credit for (1) self-
reporting the 2012 DUI to security officials; (2) being truthful and complete during the
security clearance process; (3) seeking assistance via the outpatient program and
following their guidance; and (4) demonstrating positive changes in behavior by
abstaining from alcohol since July 2014.  By doing those things, Applicant did what is32
expected of a person who is currently eligible for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents resulting in criminal convictions
does not justify current doubt about his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability
to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).33
8
person concept.  I also weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the33
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I
conclude he met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.   
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
