KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  Disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence is not enough to show
that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other
Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 13-01297.a1
DATE: 03/09/2015
DATE: March 9, 2015
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-01297
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 20, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On December 11, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s findings of Fact
Applicant is employed by a Defense contractor, in support of U.S. military objectives
overseas.  He was born in Iran, coming to the U.S. in the mid-1980s and becoming a U.S. citizen in
the early 1990s.  He is married to a U.S. citizen.  He has performed duties twice previously in
overseas locations on behalf of U.S. military objectives.
Applicant has five siblings, and three siblings-in-law, who are citizens and residents of Iran.
Applicant contacts them three or four times a year by phone.  He has another sibling who is a citizen
of Iran but a resident of a third country.  He contacts this sibling about four times a year.  Applicant
has a niece and a nephew who are citizens and residents of Iran.  His parents are deceased.
As a young adult, Applicant worked part time under the direction of an agency of the Iranian
government.  Applicant enjoys a good reputation for his work ethic, enthusiasm, and humility.  One
of Applicant’s character references, a senior officer in the U.S. military, describes him as
trustworthy and reliable.
Iran has been hostile to the U.S. since the 1979 revolution.  It supports international terrorist
groups.  It has pursued weapons of mass destruction and is possibly attempting to build a nuclear
weapon.  Iran is known to conduct intelligence operations and economic espionage against the U.S.
Iran is a nation whose interests are inimical to the U.S.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s connections in Iran raised security concerns.  He also
concluded that none of the mitigating conditions were applicable.  He noted Applicant’s contact with
his siblings, which he described as neither casual nor infrequent.  He stated that, despite Applicant’s
ties to the U.S., his family members in Iran could place him in a position of having to choose
between their interests and those of U.S. security.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted
Applicant’s service under dangerous circumstances.  However, Applicant’s family circumstances
and the nature of the Iranian regime left the Judge with doubts that had to be resolved in favor of
national security.
Discussion
Applicant cites to favorable evidence that, he argues, the Judge failed to consider.  This
evidence includes his character references, his service to the U.S. overseas, and his expressions of
loyalty to the U.S.  The Judge discussed this evidence in his Analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-00281 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 30, 2014).  Applicant’s brief consists, in essence, of a
3
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  This argument is not sufficient to show
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00976 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2015).  Applicant has cited to some
Hearing Office cases in support of his appeal.  We give these cases due consideration.  However,
they have significant factual differences from Applicant’s, for example concerning the foreign
country at issue and the nature of the family relationships involved.  In any event, Hearing Office
cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., Id. at 3.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “[A clearance denial] may be based upon concerns
completely unrelated to conduct, such as having close relatives residing in a country hostile to the
United States.”  Id. at 528-9.  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
