      1At the hearing, Guideline B was withdrawn.
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)  ISCR Case No. 14-01583
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On June 6, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 29, 2014.  A notice of
hearing was issued on January 14, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 20, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-3 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified but did not submit any documents for the record. The transcript was received
2
on March 2, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility
for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation ¶ 1.a and
denied 1.b.
Applicant is a 33-year-old senior security engineer. He graduated from high
school in June 2000. In 2002, Applicant obtained a diploma in network administration
from a technical college. He has worked for his current employer for more than nine
years. However, he has worked in the field since 2002. This is his first request for a
security clearance. (GX 1) He believes that he has a public trust position. (Tr. 28)
Applicant is married and has three children. His first daughter was born
prematurely and has severe medical problems, including cerebral palsy. He also has
two other children, who are ten and eight years old. (Tr. ) His wife had a medical issue
that had prevented her from working. (Tr. 13)
The SOR alleges two delinquent accounts (first and second mortgage loans) in
the total amount of about $92,800.  (GX 2) The second mortgage was charged off in the
amount of approximately $72,470. The first mortgage is past due in the amount of
$20,301. This account is in foreclosure status. The mortgage loan was an 80/20 loan.
Applicant purchased a home in 2005. The cost was approximately $350,000.  He
was advised that this property was a sound one and that it would have a mortgage of
about $1,500 a month. Applicant’s loan was approved. He believed he could afford that
amount, and he decided to purchase the house. (Tr. 11) When Applicant went to
settlement, he learned that the monthly payment would be about $2,800. He realizes
that he should have chosen not to go ahead with the deal. However, he was told by the
loan officer that there could be repercussions since the process was already into
closing. (Tr. 27)  He did not seek legal advice. At the closing, the broker told him that if
he paid six months of mortgage loan payments, he would qualify for a refinance of the
loan. During that time, Applicant relied on credit cards for his other living expenses. (Tr.
12) Applicant managed to pay the mortgage loan for almost three years. (GX 1) When
he tried to finance the loans after six months, he was denied by the lender. (Tr. 13) 
Applicant vacated the property in February 2009. He decided to rent a property
that he could afford. He did not realize that he could have remained in the house until a
foreclosure. His priority was to  provide for his wife and family. (Tr. 14) The house went
to foreclosure in 2010. The house sold for $145,000. (Tr. 23) He learned this by going to
property records.  After the foreclosure, the bank did not contact Applicant. It was his
understanding that due to the selling of the property, he had no balance. (Tr. 14) 
Applicant was contacted by the company who owned the second  mortgage loan.
Applicant told them that the property was foreclosed and that he had not lived in it since
2009. (Tr. 15) Initially, he asked about a short sale or loan modification but was denied.
      2 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      4 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
3
Applicant was not offered a settlement amount. He understands that it is now on his
credit report. Applicant’s 2014 credit bureau report shows a zero balance for the first
mortgage. (GX 3)
Applicant earns approximately $85,000 a year. His wife also works and earns
approximately $21,000 a year. Applicant has no difficulty meeting his current expenses.
He has also paid his credit card balances. His credit report supports his affirmation and
notes  zero balances on various credit cards. (GX 3) He has a 401(k) plan and savings
of about $10,000. (Tr. 22)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”2 The burden of proof is something less than a
preponderance of evidence.3 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.4 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
      5 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      7 Id.
4
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”5 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”6 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.7 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted he owes delinquent debt as reported in his SOR. His home
mortgage loans (80/20) on a home that he purchased in 2005 are not resolved.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to
overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant relied on a broker’s advice that (80/20) approved home mortgage
loans would result in a total monthly payment of about $1,500. Applicant knew he could
afford that amount. When he went to settlement, he was told by the loan officer that the
monthly amount would be $2,800. He regrets that he did not stop the process, but he
was told that he could be liable by the seller since the process already reached closing.
5
He was also told that he could refinance after six months of payments. He believed
them. He now understands that he should have sought legal advice, but he did not.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies. He relied on the mortgage broker concerning a modification after six
months of monthly payments.  Applicant made payments on the home mortgage loans
for three years. Thereafter, when he tried to obtain a modification, he was denied. He
used credit cards to pay for daily living expenses so that he could keep paying the loans
for the home. Eventually, he could not. He paid the credit card balances. He moved to a
property that he could rent. In 2010, he learned that the home went to foreclosure and
sold for $145,000. He was never contacted by the first loan company. He was contacted
by the second company and tried to explain the situation. He was never offered a
settlement and he could not pay the entire amount. He also believed since the house
was sold, he did not owe any balance. I find that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant took steps toward
a loan modification, but was denied.  He paid the monthly mortgage loan for almost
three years. He paid his credit cards that he had used for his daily expenses. The one
mortgage loan is not reflected on his credit report. The home went to foreclosure and he
also believed that he did not have a balance. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications
that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) partially applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 33 years old.  Applicant has held a public trust position and has worked for
his current employer since 2005. When Applicant purchased a home in 2005, he
received bad advice. He understands that he should not have continued with the
process at closing, but he was under the impression that he would be liable by the
seller. He paid the high mortgage loan for three years. He tried to get a modification
after six months, as he was told at the closing. He was denied. Applicant has paid his
credit card debts and has provided for his family. He has no other debts. Applicant has
steady employment and earns sufficient income to support his family. 
Applicant admits that he made a great mistake by not seeking legal advice
concerning the mortgage. He realizes that he had to use credit to pay for daily living
expenses. He does not intend to make any major purchase in his life until he has all the
details. He regrets the mistake. He believed the foreclosure and the sale absolved him
from any balance. He has shown sound judgment since then and has been reliable with
renting property and paying his credit card bills. He has provided for his family. He has
persuaded me that he has mitigated the Government’s case concerning security
concerns under the financial considerations guideline. I do not believe that this situation
will recur. I have no doubts about his current reliability and judgment. He has met his
burden of proof.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: WITHDRAWN
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
