KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant relies on new evidence which the Board cannot consider. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02655.a1
DATE: 03/11/2015
DATE: March 11, 2015
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02655
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
22, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 22, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.
Rather, his submissions contain new evidence in the form statements that he has abstained from the
use of alcohol since receiving the Judge’s adverse decision, and is now seeking help through one
of the Alcohol Anonymous (AA) meetings offered in his community.  He also explains why he had
not previously sought help for his alcohol problem.
The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has
alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error
on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields   
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
