 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02747 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence and foreign 
preference. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On September 26, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) 
applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (e-QIP, dated November 25, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline C 
(Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed reasons why the 
DOD CAF could not make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, dated and notarized on November 5, 2014,2 Applicant responded to 
the SOR allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on January 12, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on January 30, 
2015, but as of March 11, 2015, he had not submitted any further documents or other 
information. The case was assigned to me on March 16, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the factual allegations 
pertaining to foreign influence and foreign preference in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.1, 1.a.2, 
1.a.4, 2.a., and 2.b.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a mechanic since August 2011.3 He had previously been employed by 
various employers in the United States. Applicant is registered with the Selective 
Service, but has never served in the U.S. military or any other military,4 and he has 
never held a security clearance.5 He has never been married.6  
 
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant and his two brothers were born in the United States.7 His parents were 
citizens of Mexico.8 Applicant's mother had a valid U.S. visa for approximately ten 
years, but his father was deported from the U.S. about three decades ago because he 
                                                          
2
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated November 5, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
4
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
5
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 25-26. 
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 5, 19-20; Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 18, 2014), at 1, 4. 
 
8
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 16-19; Item 5, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
3 
                                      
 
was in the United States without proper documentation.9 Applicant's father is an artist 
and his mother operates a small business selling Mexican artwork.10 Applicant's 
brothers are both married and reside in Mexico.11 Applicant was educated through high 
school in Mexico.12 Following his high school graduation, Applicant attended an 
additional class in English in the U.S.13 Applicant resides with his parents in Mexico.14 
No member of Applicant's family has any relationship to the Mexican government, its 
military, or intelligence services.15 Applicant has a U.S. passport, but has never held a 
Mexican passport.16 
 
When Applicant attempted to exercise his right to vote as a U.S. citizen in 2006, 
he was denied that opportunity because he did not have a U.S. residence address.17 He 
did vote in Mexican federal elections in 2006 and 2012.18 Applicant does not have any 
financial interests, including real property, or bank accounts, in Mexico, and has no 
interest in purchasing real estate in Mexico.19 Applicant's total loyalty is to the United 
States, and while he possesses dual citizenship with Mexico and the United States, he 
is willing to renounce his Mexican citizenship.20 
 
About three years ago, Applicant applied to the U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP) for the SENTRI Program (Secure Electronic Network for Travelers 
Rapid Inspection) as a "Trusted Traveler." His application was approved.21 The SENTRI 
Program provides expedited CBP processing for pre-approved, low-risk travelers. 
Applicants must voluntarily undergo a thorough biographical background check against 
criminal, law enforcement, customs, immigration, and terrorist indices; a 10-fingerprint 
law enforcement check; and a personal interview with a CBP Officer.22  
 
                                                          
9
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4; Item 5, supra note 7, at 3-4. 
 
10
 Item 5, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
11
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 4; Item 4, supra note 1, at 19-20. 
 
12
 Item 5, supra note 7, at 2; Item 3, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
13
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
14
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
15
 Item 5, supra note 7, at 3-4; Item 4, supra note 1, at 17-19. 
 
16
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6-7. 
 
17
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 6. 
 
18
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 6. But see Item 4, supra note 1, at 22, wherein Applicant denied ever voting in an 
election in a foreign country. 
 
19
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 21; Item 5, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
20
 Item 5, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
21
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
22
 See SENTRI, at http://www.cbp.gov/travel/trusted-traveler-programs/sentri 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicants may not qualify for participation in the SENTRI program if they: 
 
 Provide false or incomplete information on the application; 
 Have been convicted of any criminal offense or have pending criminal charges to 
include outstanding warrants; 
 Have been found in violation of any customs, immigration, or agriculture 
regulations or laws in any country; 
 Are the subject of an ongoing investigation by any federal, state, or local law 
enforcement agency; 
 Are inadmissible to the United States under immigration regulation, including 
applicants with approved waivers of inadmissibility or parole documentation; or 
 Cannot satisfy CBP of their low-risk status. 
 
Once applicants are approved they are issued Radio Frequency Identification 
Document (RFID) cards that will identify their record and status in the CBP database 
upon arrival at the U.S. port of entry. SENTRI users have access to specific, dedicated 
primary lanes into the United States at Southern land borders. SENTRI members may 
also use the NEXUS lanes when entering the U.S. from Canada by land. U.S. citizens 
and U.S. lawful permanent residents enrolled in SENTRI are also able to use Global 
Entry kiosks and are eligible for TSA Precheck.23 
 
The Government has conceded that there is “no heightened risk associated with 
Mexico.”24 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”25 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”26   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
23
 SENTRI, supra note 22. 
 
24
 FORM, at 2. 
 
25
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
26
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”27 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.28  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”29 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”30 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
                                                          
27
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
28
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
29
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
30
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.31 Applicant’s close relationships with his parents, 
both of whom are citizens of Mexico, and his two brothers, both of whom are native-
born citizens of the United States, and all of whom are residents of Mexico, are current 
security concerns for the Government. Applicant’s decision to reside with his parents in 
Mexico is also a current security concern. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), it is potentially disqualifying where there is “contact with a foreign family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” In addition, it is 
potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 7(d) where there is “sharing living quarters with a 
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(d) apply in this case. However, the security significance of these identified 
conditions requires further examination of Applicant’s respective relationships to 
determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
                                                          
31
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.32 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”33 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, Applicant and his two brothers are native-born U.S. citizens, and 
while his two brothers are married and reside near their parents, Applicant resides with 
his parents, in Mexico. Applicant works in the United States and crosses the 
international border on a daily basis. After undergoing an extensive investigation, 
Applicant qualified for the SENTRI program as a trusted traveler. It remains unclear as 
to what the significant security concerns might be for the Government has conceded 
                                                          
32
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
33
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
8 
                                      
 
that there is “no heightened risk associated with Mexico,” and has offered no evidence 
to indicate or substantiate conditions that could constitute a heightened risk in this 
instance.  Moreover, it appears that the Government’s main concern is not the actions 
of the Mexican government or those of criminals, terrorists, and narco-terrorists in 
conducting illegal terrorist attacks, extortion, and kidnappings. The sole concern 
appears to be simply that three brothers who are native-born U.S. citizens, including 
Applicant, have parents who are Mexican citizen-residents, and Applicant continues to 
reside with them. No member of Applicant's family has any relationship to the Mexican 
government, its military, or intelligence services. Applicant has no financial and property 
interests in Mexico. It is unlikely that Applicant would have to choose between the 
interests of his family and the interests of the United States.  
 
There is always a potential for a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion when one resides in a foreign country. 
However, the potential for such risk is considerably diminished in this instance and there 
is little substantial risk of any kind of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security clearance.  
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen, is registered with the Selective Service, 
has a U.S. passport, and has worked in the United States all his working life. He has 
been employed in the United States as a mechanic by a federal contractor since August 
2011. He is a trusted traveler under the SENTRI Program. He is disappointed that he 
cannot bring his parents into the United States so they could reside here. I am 
persuaded that Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided, and 
that he has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [he] 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶¶ 
8(a) and 8(b) apply.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member” is 
potentially disqualifying. This includes AG ¶ 10(a)(3), “accepting educational, medical, 
retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country;” AG ¶ 10(a)(4), 
“residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;” and AG ¶ 10(a)(7), 
“voting in a foreign election,” all of which may raise security concerns. Applicant was 
born in the United States to Mexican citizens. He was raised and educated in Mexico. 
He has resided in Mexico his entire life. He has voted in Mexican federal elections. By 
 
9 
                                      
 
his actions in obtaining his high school education in Mexico and voting in Mexican 
federal elections, Applicant exercised the rights and privileges of foreign citizenship. AG 
¶¶ 10(a)(3) and 10(a)(7) apply. AG ¶ 10(a)(4) does not apply for Applicant’s continuing 
residence in Mexico has nothing to do with meeting Mexican citizenship requirements. 
Applicant’s Mexican citizenship was derived from his parents’ Mexican citizenship. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference.  Under AG ¶ 11(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the “dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or 
birth in a foreign country.”  Similarly, AG ¶ 11(b) may apply where “the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” In addition, AG ¶ 11(c) may apply 
if the “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred 
before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.”  
 Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, has dual Mexican citizenship based solely 
on his parents’ citizenship. Dual citizenship, by itself, is not an automatic bar to a 
security clearance. It is only a security concern if the individual has actively exercised 
the rights and privileges of the foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. 
Applicant accepted educational benefits from Mexico by attending Mexican schools 
through his high school graduation, but those rights occurred when Applicant was still a 
minor. He voted in two Mexican federal elections, but he was still considered a minor 
when he voted in 2006. Applicant’s exercise of the right to vote in Mexico in 2012 
occurred when he was 22 years old. That one action, not his decision to reside with his 
parents in Mexico, is the sole decision having security significance. Applicant stated 
unequivocally that he is willing to renounce his Mexican citizenship. Considering 
Applicant’s explanations and his actions, I find ¶¶ 11(a) and 11(b) apply, while 11(c) 
only partially applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
 
10 
                                      
 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.34       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his 
parents remain Mexican citizen-residents. He resides with them, and he maintains a 
close and continuing contact and relationship with them. He voted in a Mexican federal 
election in 2012.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant declared that his life is here in the United States and that he loves this 
country. His only disappointment is that he could not bring his parents to the United 
States so that they could reside here, and he could have attended school here. His two 
brothers are native-born U.S. citizens. Moreover, while there might be a minimum 
“heightened risk” of negative activities occurring in Mexico, it should also be 
remembered that terrorists and would-be terrorists are also active in the United States, 
creating a substantial risk here as well. Applicant is a trusted traveler who crosses the 
Mexican-U.S. border on a daily basis to work with a government contractor. He has no 
financial and property interests in Mexico. There is a reduced risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his foreign influence and foreign preference. See AG ¶ 
2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.1:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.2:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a.3:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.4:   For Applicant 
    
  
                                                          
34
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
 
           ________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
