 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case: 14-011691 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 3, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated two delinquent student-loan debts totaling $19,675. Her 
delinquencies were due to unemployment and underemployment. She provided 
documentation to show she is addressing these debts. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for a public trust position is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 11, 2012, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 4.) On July 16, 2014, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
                                                 
1 Department Counsel’s Brief, dated November 12, 2014, incorrectly identifies this case as an ISCR case. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) in an undated submission, and 
requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 4.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on November 17, 2014. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing seven items, was received by Applicant on December 12, 2014. She was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. On January 5, 2015, she 
submitted 14 pages of additional information (Reply). Department Counsel had no 
objection to her Reply, and it was admitted into the record.  DOHA assigned the case to 
me on February 10, 2015.  
 
Rulings on Evidence 
 
Item 5 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of 
Applicant. The six-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant conducted 
on February 19, 2013. An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is 
authenticated by a witness.1 Although Applicant, who is representing herself, has not 
raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua sponte. Item 5 is not authenticated, 
and Applicant’s failure to raise this issue in her reply to the FORM is not a knowing 
waiver of the rule.2 Accordingly, Item 5 is not admissible and is not considered in this 
Decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. She is unmarried and has no children. Applicant 
attended a state university from September 2006 through May 2007. She worked as a 
cashier for a fast-food restaurant from June 2007 to April 2008. She was employed as a 
sales associate for a retail clothing store from August 2008 to February 2012. She was 
unemployed from February 2012 through the date of her eQIP, December 2012. Her 
SOR-listed debts are student loans from the period she attended the state university. 
She was hired by her present employer, a government contractor, sometime after she 
submitted her eQIP. (Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant owes approximately $19,675 in delinquent student-
loan debts to two creditors. In her Answer, Applicant admitted both debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b, with explanations. (Item 3.) Her debts are also documented in the record credit 
                                                 
1 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal 
Board restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible).  
2 Wavier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right 
and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
 
3 
 
 
reports dated December 20, 2012 and March 4, 2014. (Item 6; Item 7.) After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant attributes her delinquent student loans to underemployment while 
working for the retail clothing store from August 2008 to February 2012. She did not 
earn enough money to afford the payment the lender requested. Subsequently, she was 
unemployed from February 2012 through at least December 2012, which further limited 
her ability to repay the debts. (Item 4; Answer; Reply.) 
 
 In August 2014 Applicant contacted a federal student loan repayment program. It 
helped her to consolidate the delinquent student loans identified in allegations 1.a and 
1.b with one lender, and created an income-based repayment program. She was 
required to make three payments of $238 in August 2014, September 2014, and 
October 2014, in order to start the consolidation and rehabilitate her debt. She provided 
documentation she successfully made the three payments as required. The loans were 
then considered rehabilitated and placed into forbearance, while the consolidation was 
completed. The loans were in forbearance as of December 2014. Her principal balance 
is $10,124.42, with a total of $16,348.15 to be repaid. Documentation shows monthly 
payments of $90.34 are scheduled to begin in February 2015 and will continue until 
February 2030. She intends to continue making her monthly payments on this debt until 
it is satisfied. She is currently employed. (Reply.)  
  
 Applicant failed to submit evidence of financial counseling, a budget, or income 
statement. She submitted no evidence concerning the quality of her professional 
performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect 
to protected information. She provided no character references describing her 
judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
 
 
4 
 
 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 During her time at a state university from 2006 to 2007, Applicant accumulated 
$19,675 in student-loan debts that she has been unable to address until August 2014. 
The evidence raises trustworthiness concerns under both conditions, thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt began accumulating in 2007 and remained 
delinquent through July 2014. She did not have the ability to make payments prior to 
2014, due to her underemployment and unemployment. However, she obtained a new 
job and, in August 2014, began addressing the student-loan debts. She has made three 
payments on her student-loan accounts. They have been rehabilitated and she has 
agreed to a new, affordable repayment plan. Future financial problems are unlikely to 
occur, as she has acted responsibly under the circumstances. The evidence supports 
the application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b).  
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that she participated in financial counseling, 
but she has established a clear plan to fully resolve her debts. AG ¶ 20(c) has 
application as there are clear indications that her delinquent debt is now under control. 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies because Applicant made a good-faith effort to negotiate a payment 
she could afford.  
 
 Applicant admitted her student-loan debts. . AG ¶ 20(e) has no application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
 
 
7 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 26-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. She became delinquent on her student loans when 
she could not afford the required payments on her retail-sales job salary. Additionally, 
she experienced an extended period of unemployment. After finding another job, 
Applicant contacted a Federal program to help rehabilitate her delinquent student loans. 
She has relied on its expertise and followed their requirements for six months. She 
appears sincere in her resolve to repay her delinquencies and the accounts are no 
longer in a delinquent status. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as 
to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. She met her burden 
to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of 
trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
