 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02048 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 22, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on January 20, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
who received it and sent back a signed receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) that was received on February 2, 2015. Applicant was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
He submitted exhibits (AE) A-1 through A-12, which were admitted into the record. The 
case was assigned to me on March 11, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations except for ¶ 1.b. 
The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is married, but separated from his wife and has 
three adult children. He has worked for his current employer since October 2008. He 
possesses a high school diploma and has taken some college courses. He retired from 
the Army in 2008 after 20 years of service.1  
  
 The SOR lists a dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy from 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and 
seven delinquent debts totaling $16,207. The debts include a medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.b); 
and other past-due credit card or consumer debts (SOR ¶ 1.c - ¶ 1.h). The SOR also 
alleges Applicant failed to file and pay his federal income taxes for years 2009 through 
2012 and that he owes delinquent taxes in the amount of approximately $10,500 (SOR 
¶ 1.i). The bankruptcy, the debts, and the delinquent taxes are supported by credit 
reports from January 2014, May 2014, and January 2015 and by Applicant’s interview 
with a defense investigator in January 2014.2 
 
 Applicant explained that his financial difficulties arose after his wife was severely 
injured in an accident in 2006. The accident left his wife unable to work. He then only 
had one income to pay his bills and got behind on his payments. He sought bankruptcy 
protection in 2007 and was making $1,700 monthly payments under the bankruptcy 
plan through early 2009. At that point, he was unable to make the payments and his 
bankruptcy was dismissed. Applicant’s explanation for not filing his federal taxes for 
years 2009 to 2012 is that he and his wife cannot discuss the issue without arguing and 
therefore nothing was done about the taxes.3  
 
 While serving in the Army in 2004, Applicant had financial issues that caused the 
issuance of a “warning notice.” The Army granted his security clearance with a warning 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 1, 6-9. 
 
3 Item 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
that subsequent unfavorable information would lead to a possible suspension of his 
clearance.4 
 
 The status of the debts and taxes is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: 
 
 The January 2014 credit report shows this medical account #1091894775 as 
being in a collection status with a balance of $2,622. The date of last activity was 
August 2010 and the date of the balance was August 2011. Applicant denied owing this 
medical debt in both his security clearance interview and his answer to the SOR. He 
claimed the debt was not his. He failed to provide documentary evidence disputing the 
debt. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: 
 
 The January 2014 credit report shows this debt as a collection account #2630425 
with a balance of $1,867. The date of last activity was May 2010 and the date of the 
balance was December 2013. In July 2014, Applicant admitted this debt and stated he 
would pay it in the next two months. He did not offer documentary evidence of payment. 
This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
 The January 2015 credit report shows this as a past-due rent debt with a balance 
of $3,138. The date of last activity was November 2013. In July 2014, Applicant 
admitted this debt and stated he would resolve it. He did not offer documentary 
evidence of payment. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e – 1.f: 
 
 The January 2014 credit report shows these as collection accounts #2600553 
and # 571584 with balances of $521 and $1,680. The date of last activity was January 
2010 and the date of the balance was January 2014 for # 2600553. The date of last 
activity was March 2010 and the date of the balance was January 2014 for # 571584. In 
July 2014, Applicant admitted these debts and stated he would pay them in the next 
                                                          
4 Since these actions were not specifically alleged in the SOR, I will not consider this evidence as 
disqualifying conduct. I will consider the evidence for determining the applicability of any mitigating 
circumstances and when I weigh the whole-person factors. See Item 10. 
 
5 Items 4, 6, 9. 
 
6 Items 4, 9. 
 
7 Items 4, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
month. He did not offer documentary evidence of payment. These debts are 
unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g – 1.h: 
 
 The January 2014 credit report shows account #26267566550905067 in the 
amount of $3,346 as included in Applicant’s 2007 Chapter 13 bankruptcy. This 
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2009. The date of last activity was June 2007 and the date 
of the balance was December 2013 for this debt. In July 2014, Applicant claimed that 
this account “now reads Paid As Agreed on my credit file.” He failed to supply 
documentary evidence supporting his assertion. The same credit report shows account 
#2641268 as a charged-off account in the amount of $2,993. The date of last activity 
was June 2007 and the date of the balance was July 2013. In July 2014, Applicant 
claimed that this account “now reads Paid As Agreed on my credit file.” He failed to 
supply documentary evidence supporting his assertion. These debts are unresolved.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: 
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence that he filed his federal taxes for years 
2009 through 2013 sometime in 2014. That same evidence shows that he owes over 
$55,000 in taxes for those years. He entered into an agreement (terms not included in 
the evidence) to pay $500 monthly to the IRS on his tax debt. He offered evidence 
showing he made one $500 payment in January 2015. Despite this payment, because 
of the penalty and interest charges, Applicant’s tax balance went up rather than down.10 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
8 Items 4, 9. 
 
9 Items 4, 9. 
 
10 Item 4; AE A-2, A-3. 
 
11 Item 4, 6; AE A-1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file Federal . . . income tax returns as required . . . . 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was later dismissed and has 
delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also failed to file and pay his 
federal income taxes for years 2009 through 2102. I find all the disqualifying conditions 
are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant provided evidence that his wife’s accident contributed to his financial 
problems. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must 
demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. He failed to present 
sufficient evidence of responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
presented no evidence of financial counseling. Even though he finally filed his federal 
tax returns for years 2009 through 2013, he owes over $55,000 in back taxes and his 
recent payment plan is not decreasing his balance. I conclude there is no clear 
evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control 
because the debts remain unpaid and his tax debt is not decreasing. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) do not apply. He failed to supply documentary evidence to show that he paid 
any debts. He also failed to document his dispute of SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I also considered Applicant’s 
personal situation, his military service, and his past financial difficulties while in the 
Army. He has not shown a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
