 Exhibit 1 (for ease of understanding, it will be referred to as a security clearance application or simply an1
application). 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 14-03629
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 45-year-old engineer, Applicant is a native-
born citizen of India who immigrated to the United States in 1995 and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2005. She met her burden to present sufficient evidence to
explain and mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns
stemming from her ties or connections to India. Accordingly, this case is decided for
Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on April 30, 2014.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Appellant Exhibit I. 4
 Exhibit 1. 5
 75–77. 6
 Tr. 78–81; see Exhibit B at 3. 7
2
(DOD),  on October 31, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining2
it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline B
for foreign influence and Guideline C for foreign preference. She answered the SOR in
writing on November 4, 2014, and she requested a decision based on the written record
in lieu of a hearing. Thereafter, Department Counsel made a timely request for a
hearing.         4
The case was assigned to me December 22, 2014. The hearing was held as
scheduled on January 29, 2015. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received
February 6, 2015. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time. Her educational background includes earning a master’s degree in
computer information systems from a U.S. university in 2000. She is employed as an
engineer for the business-operations team of a technology company. Beginning in April
2013, she worked as a consultant for the technology company until she became a full-
time employee in March 2014. 
One month later, Applicant’s employer decided to sponsor her for a security
clearance, and she submitted the necessary application.  That action was taken after5
the company’s chief executive officer (CEO) and chief operating officer (COO) were
satisfied that their internal-review process sufficiently vetted Applicant.  The COO6
testified at the hearing that they were “very impressed” and “delighted” with Applicant’s
job performance, and he had no concerns about her character or trustworthiness.  The7
company’s internal-review process included a review of Applicant by the company’s
 Exhibit B at 2. 8
 Tr. 70. 9
 Tr. 42–43. 10
 Exhibit 1. 11
 Tr. 49–50. 12
 Exhibit A at 10. 13
 Tr. 53. 14
 Exhibit A at 4, 5, and 6.15
3
facility security officer (FSO), a former investigator of national security matters related to
industry with 41 years of experience at a major federal law enforcement agency.  Based8
on the review, the FSO testified at the hearing that Applicant was an “excellent
candidate” for a security clearance.9
1. Applicant’s background in India and immigration to the United States
Applicant was born and raised in India. She grew up on military bases in India
because her father, a physician, served as an officer in the Indian Army.  In 1991, she10
earned a bachelor’s degree in commerce (with an emphasis in statistics) while at the
same time earning an honors diploma in systems management from an institute of
information technology. During 1991–1993, she earned a bachelor’s degree in
education, and she then went on to work as a teacher. 
In about 1994, Applicant met her future husband, who was then a citizen of India
living and working in the United States. They decided to marry and move to the United
States. They wed in January 1995 in India, and they entered the United States within
ten days of their wedding.  Applicant was then 25 years old. 11
By 1997, Applicant and her husband had decided to remain permanently in the
United States, because they were both very happy with the work environment and their 
quality of life, and they knew they wanted to raise a family here.  They bought a home12
that same year and have lived there continuously to date. Their home, for tax purposes,
has an assessed value of about $450,000,  although she estimated the market value at13
about $700,000 to $800,000.14
       
2. Applicant’s family ties to the United States and India  
Applicant and her husband became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2005 and 2006,
respectively, and she obtained a U.S. passport that same year.  They have three15
 Exhibit A at 7, 8, and 9. 16
 Tr. 51. 17
 Tr. 42–44. 18
 Tr. 40. 19
 Tr. 58–59. 20
 Tr. 60–61.21
 Tr. 60. 22
 Tr. 42. 23
4
children, ages 15, 12, and 10, who are native-born U.S. citizens.  The eldest child is16
attending a parochial high school while the other two attend a private school. She
described her children as “absolutely Americans” who are fully immersed into American
life, and who, when visiting India, do so as tourists.  17
Applicant’s father and mother are both citizens of and residents in India. Her
father, now age 80, was a career military officer in the Indian Army.  A physician by18
training, he served in the medical corps as a doctor working in Army hospitals, and he
also served as a professor of medicine. He retired more than 20 years ago at the rank
of brigadier. As such, he receives retired pay or a pension from the Indian government.
He has continued to practice medicine in a volunteer capacity for a charity hospital.
Applicant described her mother as a housewife.  She has contact with her parents by19
calling them on a weekly basis.  Applicant does not provide any type of financial20
support to her parents.      
Applicant has one sibling, an older brother, who is a citizen of and resident in
India. Her brother lives in the same city as their parents. A physician by training, her
brother practices medicine for a living. She has contact with her brother by calling him
on a monthly basis.
Applicant also has in-laws who are citizens of and residents in India. She
described her father-in-law as a retired civil engineer and her mother-in-law as a
housewife.  She stated that she has “a normal in-laws relationship” with her husband’s21
parents.  She estimated having contact with her parents-in-law by calling them on a22
less frequent basis than her parents, perhaps every other week or so. She and her
husband do not provide any type of financial support to her parents-in-law. 
Applicant’s husband has two siblings.  Her sister-in-law is a married housewife23
who lives in a major city in India. Her brother-in-law is a computer engineer who lives
with her husband’s parents in a major city in India.
 Tr. 59.24
 Exhibit B at 2 (information from the U.S. Embassy in India); Exhibit B at 3 (information from the Consulate25
General of India, Houston, Texas).
 Exhibit B at 2 (information from the India OCI Center).26
 Exhibit B at 1.27
 Exhibit B at 1 and Exhibit 1. 28
 Tr. 56–57. 29
 Tr. 57. 30
5
Applicant expressed no hesitation or reluctance when stating that her family in
the United States comes first ahead of her family in India.24
3. Applicant’s use of an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) registration certificate
In August 2006, after obtaining U.S. citizenship, Applicant obtained an OCI
registration certificate from the Indian government to facilitate travel to India. By way of
background, the Indian government’s OCI program is often incorrectly described as
offering dual nationality or citizenship, but that is not the case as India does not
recognize or permit dual citizenship.  Instead, the OCI program amounts to the25
issuance of a travel document or visa that provides some travel and residency
privileges. 
The main benefits of the OCI program are (1) multiple-entry, lifelong visa to visit
India; (2) exemption from reporting to police authorities for any length of stay in India;
and (3) parity with nonresident Indians in financial, economic, and education fields
except in relation to acquisition of agriculture and plantation properties.  The OCI26
holder is not eligible to exercise rights of citizenship, such as voting. The visa stamp is
placed in the traveler’s non-Indian passport. 
Applicant presented a copy of the relevant page of her U.S. passport showing the
overseas citizen visa stamp.  Applicant used that visa in her U.S. passport when she27
traveled to India to visit her family in 2006, 2009, 2011, and 2014.  She explained her28
rationale as follows:
So, when we applied for the certificate it was just introduced by the Indian
government. It does ease the process of having to apply for a visa every
time you want to travel. And it just takes care of the overhead of having to
go through the additional hassle of doing that. So it seemed the natural
thing to do.29
She further explained that all foreign travel was with her U.S. passport, and that she
was willing to give up the OCI visa.30
 Tr. 53. 31
 Tr. 54–55. 32
 This information is gleaned from Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice, which was granted,33
and documentary matters presented by Applicant. Exhibits 2 and C.  
6
4. Applicant’s financial interests in the United States and India
Applicant has no financial, business, or pecuniary interests in India, and all such
interests are in the United States. In addition to their incomes earned from their
employment, Applicant and her husband own a home with an estimated market value of
$700,000 to $800,000. She also believes they have sufficient savings to take care of
their children’s education.  She estimated they have a net worth in excess of $131
million.   32
5. Applicant’s credibility during the hearing
Applicant was businesslike, polite, and respectful throughout the hearing, and
she answered questions in an open and honest way without hesitation. I was favorably
impressed by Applicant, and I had no concerns about her credibility or truthfulness. 
6. Background information on India33
India is the world’s largest democracy. It has a multiparty, federal, parliamentary
democracy with a bicameral parliament, and a population of more than one billion. Its
political history since it gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 includes several
armed conflicts with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic
outbreaks of religious riots, and violent attacks by several separatists and terrorist
groups in different parts of the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism
throughout the country, including attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners
are known to congregate or visit. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in
creating a stable Asia. To that end, the United States and India share membership in a
variety of international organizations, such as the United Nations (UN), G-20, and
World Trade Organization, for example. The United States supports a reformed UN
Security Council that includes India as a permanent member.
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in
international affairs. The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear
weapons programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic
partnerships with Iran. But the United States recognizes that India is important to U.S.
interests. The U.S.–India Strategic Dialogue, launched in 2009, provides opportunities
to strengthen collaboration in areas including energy, climate change, trade, education,
and counterterrorism. The fifth annual meeting was held in 2014.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to34
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.35
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 36
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 37
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).38
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.39
7
In 2015 President Obama called India one of the defining partnerships of the 21st
century, one which will be vital to the U.S. strategic interests in Asia-Pacific and across
the globe. The U.S.–Indian relationship is rooted in common values, including the rule of
law, respect for diversity, and democratic government. The United States is one of
India’s largest trade and investment partners.
In the past, India had longstanding military supply relationships with the Soviet
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts.
In a 2008 report to Congress, India was one of many countries involved in criminal
espionage and U.S. export controls enforcement cases.
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the police
force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police and
security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to support
separatist and terrorist groups. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As34
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt35
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An36
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  37
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting38
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An39
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.40
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.41
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 42
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).43
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.44
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 45
8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate40
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  41
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s42
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.43
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it44
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
1. The foreign influence concern
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s ties to India
disqualify her from eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline B for
foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt45
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
 AG ¶ 6. 46
9
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.46
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s ties to India, I have especially considered the following disqualifying
conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information. 
Based on U.S. concerns about (1) industrial and economic espionage, (2) the risk of
terrorism in India, (3) India’s relationships with Iran, Pakistan, and Russia, and (4)
human-rights matters, India meets the heightened-risk standard in AG ¶ 7(a).  
Applicant’s family ties to India are sufficient to raise a concern. Although her
husband and three children are U.S. citizens living in the United States, Applicant’s
mother, father, and brother, as well as her in-laws, are citizens of and residents in India.
None of her family members or in-laws in India are in a job or position that is particularly
troubling, but her father is a retired Indian Army officer who reached the rank of
brigadier. Although he retired many years ago, his status as a retired Army officer does
create a potential conflict of interest. Taken together, her family ties to India are
sufficient to justify further review.
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and 
 AG ¶¶ 9, 10, and 11 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 47
10
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant is a successful engineer who has spent the vast majority of her
adulthood in the United States. She and her husband have lived, worked, and raised a
family in the United States for the last 20 years. Their financial interests, which are
substantial, are solely in the United States. Her ties or connections to her family
members and in-laws in India are about what you would expect of a first-generation
immigrant given the time and distance between them. She is being a good daughter by
keeping in regular contact, via telephone calls, with her parents, while she has less
frequent contact with her brother and in-laws. That contact has included trips to India to
visit family. But her strongest family ties are to her family, her husband and three
children, who are U.S. citizens living in the United States. She made that point quite
evident when she unequivocally stated that her family here comes first. Taken together,
her family, employment, and financial ties to the United States are stronger than her ties
to India.    
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has family ties to India. Those circumstances should not be
dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, especially considering the matters the
United States views of concern in India. On balance, I am satisfied that this is not a
case of “divided loyalties,” with an applicant who has one foot in each country, as
contemplated by the guideline. Instead, I am satisfied that Applicant has both feet firmly
planted in the United States and those ties, after 20 years, are now quite strong. Any
security concern or potential conflict of interest presented by her ties to India is
outweighed and overcome by her much stronger family, employment, and financial ties
to the United States. I am confident that Applicant can be expected to resolve any such
concern or potential conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
2. The foreign preference concern
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline C is whether Applicant’s possession
and use of an OCI visa since 2006 disqualifies her from eligibility for access to classified
information. Under Guideline C for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may47
be questioned or put into doubt due to actions that indicate a foreign preference. The
overall concern is:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
 AG ¶ 9.48
 In the alternative, if the OCI visa does fall under a disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10, I would still conclude49
that Applicant mitigated the concern under the same rationale. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(2). 50
 AG ¶ 2(a)(7). 51
11
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.48
Applicant has rebutted the allegation, in part, in SOR ¶ 1.a that she exercised
dual citizenship with India and the United States. She presented persuasive
documentary evidence, from both the United States and India, that the OCI visa is not
dual citizenship and does not confer rights of citizenship because India does not permit
dual citizenship. For that reason, obtaining and using the OCI visa is not an exercise of
foreign citizenship. The OCI visa does not fall under the plain meaning of the
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), because it was not an “exercise of any right,
privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” nor does it
fall under the other disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 10(b), (c), or (d).  49
But that does not end the analysis, because possession and use of the OCI visa
does fall under the general concern at AG ¶ 9, by acting ‘”in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States.” The OCI visa, although not a
privilege or benefit of citizenship, is a privilege or benefit extended to Applicant as a
former citizen of India. According, the DOD was justified in inquiring into Applicant’s
possession and use of the OCI visa after becoming a U.S. citizen.
In mitigation, like the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 10, this case does not fall
under any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 11, but that too does not end the
analysis. First, I considered the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s conduct, to
include her knowledgeable participation.  She was not working for a defense contractor50
in a cleared environment when she obtained the OCI visa nearly ten years ago. She did
not know in 2006, nor should she have known, that her possession and use of the OCI
visa would fall under the scrutiny of DOD security officials years later in 2014–2015. 
Second, I considered Applicant’s motivation in obtaining the OCI visa.  She51
explained she obtained the OCI visa in 2006 to ease travel to India, because it is a
permanent travel document that allows multiple entries. In other words, her motivation
was convenience (as opposed to taking advantage of an opportunity without regard for
the consequences), which is benign or neutral and not a demonstration of a preference
for India over the United States. Had her motivation been otherwise, she could have
decided to remain an Indian citizen living in the United States as a lawful resident alien
and traveled on an Indian passport, a course of action she rejected in 2005 when she
became a U.S. citizen.  
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).52
12
Third, I considered Applicant’s willingness or lack thereof to forgo the benefit of
the OCI visa. At the hearing, she expressed a willingness to give up or relinquish the
OCI visa. Her willingness to do so is a strong indication that she does not prefer India
over the United States. 
Applicant appears to be a model immigrant who is fully invested in the United
States in various ways (e.g., children, employment, education, and financial), and those
circumstances are very unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. Her possession
and use of the OCI visa, although not a minor or trivial matter, does not justify an
unfavorable clearance decision based on a foreign preference over the United States.   
Applicant met her burden to present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate
the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns stemming from her ties
or connections to India. I have no doubts about her reliability, trustworthiness, good
judgment. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I52
conclude that she has met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
