1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 14-02143 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He used marijuana from June 
2005 until 14 months before the hearing. He signed a statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any future illegal drug involvement. The passage of time since 
his last usage is limited, but is sufficient to mitigate the drug involvement concern. The 
criminal conduct security concern is also mitigated. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 15, 
2014, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
2 
 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. In an undated response, Applicant answered the SOR and requested 
a hearing. On January 15, 2015, I was assigned the case. On January 27, 2015, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing convened on February 9, 2015. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 and 2 
and Applicant’s Exhibits A, without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. Additional material (Ex. B through E) was 
submitted and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing 
as did his spouse. On February 19, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted using marijuana once every two or 
three months from June 2005 to December 2013. He also admitted purchasing marijuana 
every four or five months during the same period. He denies continuing to associate with 
individuals who use illegal drugs and admits the Guideline J, criminal conduct, allegation 
related to his marijuana use. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old systems administrator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 2013, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. Applicant’s co-
workers and supervisors state: Applicant is an upstanding citizen and a proactive 
member of the community who has a strong work ethic and personal integrity. (Ex. B, C, 
D) 
 
On his December 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), he indicated that he would buy marijuana and smoke it on occasion. (Ex. 1) His first 
involvement was in June 2005, when he would have been 18 years old and a high –
school senior. (Tr. 14) From 2010 to 2013, Applicant used marijuana three to five times a 
year. (Tr. 25) During those three years, he used it 12 to 15 times. (Tr. 25)  
 
 Applicant, in his January 2014 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), said he fully 
disclosed his past illegal drug usage and possession. He stated he smoked marijuana 
with friends every two or three months. (Ex. 2) Every four or five months, he would 
purchase enough marijuana for one or two cigarettes. (Ex. 2) He indicated he last used 
marijuana in December 2013 and there were periods where he had previously abstained 
from using. At the beginning of 2013, he had abstained. He stopped using because “he 
felt like he was wasting time and his life. It also is not worth the risk and his wife has 
asthma, and it was not good for her to be around it.” (Ex. 2)  
 
 At the time of the PSI, one of Applicant’s friends still smoked marijuana, but his 
other friends had stopped. (Ex. 2) In November 2014, he last saw this friend at a 
wedding. (Tr. 22) He told his friend that his life had changed, and he had stopped using 
marijuana. (Tr. 22) He stated none “of my friends really smoke anymore.” (Tr. 26)  
                                                                                                                                                                                              
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
3 
 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant indicated that smoking marijuana was a waste of time 
and money and did not contribute to reaching his goals. (Tr. 15) It is illegal. His wife is 
against it and does not tolerate it. She had given him a March 2014 deadline to quit using 
marijuana. (Tr. 30) He stopped before the deadline arrived. His wife is certain he will not 
use marijuana again. (Tr. 32) His goals are for his wife to return to school, to save up, 
and buy a house. (Tr. 26) With a clearance, he would be eligible to become a senior 
systems administrator. (Tr. 27)  
 
 Applicant graduated from college in 2009 and he married in October 2013 – two 
months before his last use. (Tr. 16) In November 2013, he started his current job. He 
made the decision to get rid of the marijuana he had and used it once after his marriage 
and after starting his current job. (Tr. 18) In retrospect, he realizes he should have 
disposed of the remaining marijuana differently. (Tr. 19) He saw the disposing of the 
marijuana as ending that part of his life. (Tr. 20) He normally purchased enough for one 
or two cigarettes so the amount remaining which he disposed of by smoking was small. 
Between August 2013 and December 2013, he used marijuana once. (Tr. 21) 
 
 At Applicant’s current job, there was no intake urinalysis, and he is not subject to 
random urinalysis. (Tr. 19) In late January 2015, one or two days after receiving the 
notice of hearing, he had a voluntary urinalysis that was negative for the presence of 
illegal drugs. (Ex. A, Tr. 24) It was the only urinalysis he has ever had. (Tr. 24) Applicant 
submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. (Ex. E) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement in that the 
use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
From 2005 until December 2013, Applicant used marijuana every two or three 
months and, during the same period, would purchase marijuana every four or five 
months. AG ¶ 25(a) and AG ¶ 25(c) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns as follows:  
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
In December 2013, Applicant used marijuana one time, the last time, two months 
after his marriage and one month after obtaining his current job. He used it to get rid of it 
for that part of his life had changed and he intended not to use marijuana in the future. It 
would have been better had he chose a different way to get rid of his remaining 
marijuana. He has no intention of using marijuana in the future. He fully disclosed his 
past use and possession on his December 2013 e-QIP and during his PSI. He was not 
attempting to hide or minimize his prior use or purchase.  
 
 There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse illegal 
drugs in the future. He has disassociated himself from drug-using associates and 
contacts. At a wedding last November, he saw a friend who is still using marijuana. 
Applicant informed his friend his life was changing and he no longer used marijuana. He 
no longer associates with the drug-abusing friends. He has made the decision that 
marijuana is no longer part of his future and is incompatible with his goals. He also 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence of 
drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively 
emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave 
too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy.  
 
6 
 
signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. AG 
¶ 26(b)(4) applies. 
 
Applicant ended his drug abuse in December 2013. The motivations to stop using 
drugs are evident. Obtaining a security clearance, potential criminal liability for 
possession of drugs and adverse health, employment, and personal effects resulting from 
drug use are among the strong motivations for remaining drug free. He understands the 
adverse results from drug abuse. He has shown or demonstrated a 14-month track record 
of abstinence from illegal drug use.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.”  
 
AG ¶ 31(a) states it may be disqualifying where there “a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses.” Similarly, AG ¶ 31(c) provides “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted” may be disqualifying. Use and possession of marijuana is still a 
federal crime.  
 
Security concerns raised by criminal conduct may be mitigated under certain 
circumstances. AG ¶ 32(a) provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns if “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s marijuana use is 
unlikely to recur. This mitigating condition partially applies. It has been less than a year 
and a half since his last used marijuana. 
 
Under AG ¶ 32(d), criminal conduct may be mitigated if “there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” Within two months of 
his marriage and within one month of obtaining Applicant=s current job, he last used 
marijuana. He has not used since. There is Aclear evidence of successful rehabilitation. 
This potentially mitigating condition applies.  
 
Under AG & 32(d), "there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity and remorse.” During 
his January 2014 interview, Applicant was forthcoming about his past use and purchase 
of marijuana. He did not try to hide or minimize his past drug involvement. 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant lifestyle and goals are 
changing. Marijuana is no longer a part of his life. He has informed his friends that he no 
longer uses marijuana. His spouse is against its use. Since 2005, he used marijuana 
three to five times a year. Since August 2013, he has used it once. He has not used since 
December 2013. 
 
Applicant’s security worthiness is based on a multitude of factors and not only on 
the passage of time since his last use. Changes in his lifestyle, goals, influence from his 
spouse, and his honesty are also factors which are very relevant. Importantly, he 
informed the Government fully about his illegal drug use when he completed his e-QIP 
and also during his PSI. His honesty in making the disclosures displays integrity, which 
makes his claim he will not use in the future, that much more deserving of belief. He most 
recently used marijuana 14 months ago, which is sufficient to mitigate the security 
concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts or concerns as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
8 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
