 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-01778 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Defense of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 10, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the administrative record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on January 20, 2015. Appellant received the FORM around February 5, 2015. 
Applicant was given 30 days to submit additional matters in response to the FORM. 
Applicant timely submitted additional matters, consisting of 27 pages. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. The FORM consists of 7 
Items which are admitted as Items 1-7. Appellant’s Response to the FORM is marked 
and admitted as Item 8. Department Counsel’s memorandum indicating no objection to 
Applicant’s Response the FORM is marked and admitted as Item 9. On March 9, 2015, 
the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
 
March 10, 2015.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old woman employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor who is applying for a security clearance. She has worked for her current 
employer since January 2010. She is a high school graduate. She is divorced and has 
no children. (Item 5)   
 
From May 2002 to October 2009, Applicant worked for Company A. On October 
15, 2009, she was terminated by Company A for violation of company policy. There is 
no information in the file from Company A which describes Applicant’s specific actions 
that caused the termination. (Item 6)  
 
On January 19, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), in conjunction with her current employer. In response 
to Section 13C Employment Record, Applicant answered “No” to the following 
questions: 
 
Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years? 
1. Fired from a job 
2. Quit after being told you would be fired 
3. Left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of 
misconduct 
4. Let a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance 
5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances 
6. Laid off from job by employer 
 
She did not disclose that she was terminated from Company A in October 2009 
for a Violation of Company Policy. The SOR alleges Applicant falsified material facts on 
an e-QIP application dated December 13, 2012, in response to Section 13C, 
Employment Record, because she failed to disclose her firing from Company A on 
October 15, 2009. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The December 13, 2012 e-QIP application is not in the 
case file. Her termination from Company A in October 2009 is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
(Item 1; Item 5) 
  
On February 13, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator conducting 
her background investigation. During the interview, Applicant volunteered that she was 
fired from Company A for not following new rules established by her new supervisor. 
Her previous supervisor told Applicant to sign the time cards for physicians. She was 
unaware of the new rule that she was not authorized to do this. Her new supervisor told 
 
3 
 
 
her that she should have known the new rules and terminated her. She subsequently 
filed for unemployment and was awarded unemployment benefits despite the objections 
of Company A. The Agent’s summary of Applicant’s personal subject interview states: 
“Unemployment – During case review, subject volunteered that she was fired from 
[Company A]…...” (Item 5).  
 
 On February 4, 2014, Applicant provided a written affidavit to another investigator 
during a follow-up interview. She once again indicated that she was fired from Company 
A for signing physician’s time sheets. She was unaware of the policy that prohibited her 
from doing so. Her former supervisor told her to sign her supervisor’s name as well as 
Applicant’s own name to the time sheets verifying that the physician’s work hours and 
pay were correct. She thought that was the correct policy. She never received any 
written or oral counseling before she was terminated. She states that she never did 
anything criminal or wrong. Her termination cannot be used as a basis for blackmail or 
coercion. (Item 7)  
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated July 10, 2014, Applicant admits she was 
terminated from Company A in October 2009. She admits providing false information on 
the e-QIP application, dated December 13, 2012. She failed to notice the question 
pertaining to her employment record was incorrect. Applicant states that during her 
background investigation interview, she promptly volunteered the information about her 
termination from Company A and the error on her e-QIP. Regarding the termination, 
Applicant stated that her previous supervisor at Company A authorized her to sign the 
timesheets of attending physicians. This practice was challenged after her supervisor 
retired and a new supervisor took over. (Item 3)  
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant repeats her past statements. She was 
wrongfully fired from Company A. She always received favorable performance reviews 
and merit increases until she was fired. Company A also falsely accused her of 
shredding documents. Company A unsuccessfully fought her claim for unemployment 
compensation. She was awarded unemployment compensation because Company A 
failed to provide proof that her termination was justified. Applicant believes the new 
management at Company A conspired to terminate her. She requests that her favorable 
performance reports over the past five years with her current employer be considered. 
(Item 8)  
 
Applicant mentions in her response to the FORM, that in addition to her e-QIP 
application completed on January 19, 2010, she overlooked the answer regarding her 
employment record on an application to upgrade to a TS/SCI clearance in 2012.  She 
indicates that when she completed the application for her upgrade to a TS/SCI 
clearance in 2012, she just resubmitted the answers on her original 2010 e-QIP 
application. She did not review her answers before submitting the 2012 application. As 
a result the same error regarding her employment record was on the 2012 application. 
During her first interview with an investigator in February 2013, she volunteered that she 
was wrongfully terminated from Company A. She later provided a signed, sworn 
 
4 
 
 
statement in February 2013 to a second investigator explaining the details of her 
termination. (Item 7, Item 8)   
 
Applicant’s performance appraisals with her current company all indicate that she 
fully meets standards. Her most recent appraisal dated, January 26, 2015, states that 
Applicant’s “performance and commitment to the program has been excellent.” She is 
“meticulous in her work and constantly strives for perfection in everything that she does 
and ensures that tasks are accurate and complete.” She is “exceptionally trustworthy, 
honest, helpful, cooperative, enthusiastic and ethical in all parts of her job and her 
performance. She is a highly valued asset to the program and the customer is 
extraordinarily pleased with her sincerity.” (Item 8)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s termination and omission 
of her termination in response to Section 13C on her December 13, 2012 security 
clearance application raises security concerns under personal conduct. Applicant has a 
substantial burden to mitigate these concerns. The following personal conduct security 
concerns apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligilibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities);  
 
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . .). 
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) applies. Applicant admits that she failed to list her employment 
termination on her e-QIP application dated December 13, 2012. While there is sufficient 
evidence that Applicant incorrectly answered her response to Section 13C on her 
September 19, 2010 e-QIP application, it was not alleged in the SOR. I considered the 
alleged falsification of Applicant’s September 19, 2010 e-QIP application as part of 
matters in extenuation and mitigation. The e-QIP application dated December 13, 2012, 
was not provided in evidence. However, Applicant admitted to the allegation in response 
to the SOR and discussed in her Response to the FORM that she did not list her 
termination from Company A on a 2012 e-QIP application to upgrade her clearance to 
TS/SCI. The Government is not required to present evidence on facts that the Applicant 
admits as true. (See Directive ¶ E3.1.14) The omissions raised concerns about 
Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability. Her actions raise an issue as to whether she 
will properly safeguard classified information.    
 
 AG ¶ 16(d) applies because Applicant’s termination for violation of company 
policy raises issues as to Applicant’s reliability and demonstrates a potential 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶ 16(e) applies because 
Applicant’s initial failure to disclose her termination on her e-QIP application made her 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
   
 The following personal conduct mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts);  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);  
 
AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur);  and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).  
  
  
 
7 
 
 
 I find AG ¶ 17(a) partially applies. During her first interview with the agent 
conducting her background investigation in February 2013, Applicant volunteered that 
she was terminated from Company A and that her answer to question 13C was wrong. I 
find this mitigating condition only partially applies because her voluntary disclosure 
cannot be considered “prompt” as required by the mitigating condition. However, I do 
find her disclosure was made in good-faith and was provided before being confronted 
with the facts. The investigator’s summary of Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview on 
February 13, 2013 noted that Applicant “volunteered” that she was terminated from 
Company A.  
 
 I find AG ¶ 17(c) applies because Applicant’s termination from Company A 
appears to be a departure from her standard work performance. Based on the evidence 
in the record, it appears Applicant’s termination was wrongful. The state unemployment 
commission awarded her unemployment benefits, despite Company A’s objections. It is 
likely Company A failed to prove sufficient cause for her termination. I find Applicant’s 
explanations that she was fired from Company A because she was unaware of a 
change in policy after a change in supervisors credible. Since her termination, Applicant 
has had a successful career with her current employer for the past five years with 
favorable performance reviews and no disciplinary problems. Her termination from 
Company A happened under unusual circumstances and is unlikely to recur. It does not 
cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) applies because Applicant volunteered the omission of her 
termination on her e-QIP application during the first time she was interviewed during her 
background investigation in February 2013. Her explanation that she resubmitted her 
answers to the 2010 e-QIP application on her 2012 e-QIP application without reviewing 
the answers is also reasonable. While it does not excuse the withholding of her October 
2009 employment termination on her security clearance applications, it is a reasonable 
explanation. The important thing is that she recognized the error and voluntarily 
provided the information during her first interview with an investigator interviewing her in 
conjunction with her background investigation.  It is unlikely that Applicant will repeat 
this behavior in the future.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) applies because Applicant’s full disclosure about her employment 
termination eliminates her vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.   
 
 Overall, Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under personal conduct.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s termination from 
Company A appears to be a departure from an otherwise successful employment 
history. While she omitted her termination in response to 13C Employment Record on 
her e-QIPs dated January 19, 2010 and December 2012, she voluntarily disclosed this 
information the first time she was interviewed in conjunction with her background 
investigation. While her voluntary disclosure cannot be considered “prompt” in 
accordance with AG ¶ 17(a), she provided the information before being confronted with 
the facts and has remained forthcoming and truthful after disclosing her omissions.     
 
Applicant’s favorable employment history with her current employer over the past 
five years demonstrates that she is a trustworthy and reliable employee.  She has 
mitigated the concerns raised under Personal Conduct.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
