 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02480 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 4, 2014. His election to have his 
case decided on the written record was ambiguous. Department Counsel sent him an 
email on October 2, 2014, seeking clarification. Applicant responded with an email on 
 
2 
 
 
October 6, 2014, in which he unambiguously chose to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on January 12, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant who 
received it on January 22, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted exhibits (AE) 
A-1 through A-8, which were admitted into the record without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on March 11, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is divorced and has four children. He pays child 
support for one child. He has worked for his current employer since August 2011. He 
served in the National Guard and received a general discharge.1   
  
 The SOR lists four debts that total $16,146. The debts include a deficiency 
amount from a repossessed vehicle for $14,658 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a telecommunications 
debt in the amount of $895 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a child support debt in the amount of $427 
(SOR ¶ 1.c); and a debt for a collection account in the amount of $166 (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
These debts are supported by credit reports from March 2013, March 2014, and 
January 2015. Applicant provided documentary evidence proving that he paid SOR ¶¶ 
1.b – 1.d.2 
 
 The sole remaining unpaid debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) resulted from a vehicle purchase 
and subsequent repossession. He purchased a truck in 2005 and because of his poor 
credit, was required to pay a high interest rate on the purchase. In the next year, he 
experienced financial difficulties because he helped his daughter and girlfriend with 
college expenses. He consented to a voluntary repossession of the truck because he 
could not make the payments. He attempted to set up a monthly payment plan with the 
creditor, but the creditor wanted to settle the account for a one-time payment of $7,000. 
Applicant could not afford this amount. A new creditor purchased this account, but 
Applicant has not contacted the creditor about payments. The date of the last payment 
on the account was April 2008. This debt is unresolved. He did not provide any 
information about his current financial status or a budget. There is no evidence that he 
sought financial counseling.3 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 7. 
 
2 Items 3, 5-9. 
 
3 Items 7, 9. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a delinquent debt that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and one remains unresolved. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant provided evidence that he assisted his daughter and girlfriend with 
college expenses, which contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for AG 
¶ 20(b) to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the 
circumstances. Although he acted responsibly by paying three of the smaller debts, he 
failed to act responsibly in dealing with the remaining large debt. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling. Although he 
paid the three small debts, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems 
are being resolved or under control because the largest debt remains unpaid. I find AG 
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. Despite some mitigation, Applicant’s financial status 
remains a concern. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I also considered Applicant’s 
personal situation. However, he has not shown a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
6 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
