                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00427
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 11, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 27th, 2013.  On April 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F, E and J for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 15, 2014, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department Counsel issued a
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 11, 2014.  Applicant did not respond to
the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on February 10, 2015.  Based upon a review
of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 15, 2014, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in all the Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations. 
Applicant is a 40 year old employee of a defense contractor.  (Item 4 at pages 5
and 12.)
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.a.~1.f, 1.h. and 1.i.  Applicant admits hat he is indebted to eight creditors in an
amount totaling in excess of $29,000.  As he has offered nothing further in this regard, I
find that these are past due.
1.g.  Applicant avers that he believes he “paid” this past-due debt to Creditor G
for $223, “2 months ago,” in May of 2014.  (Answer at page 2.)  However, as he has
offered nothing further in this regard, I also find that this debt is past due.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
2.a.  Applicant admits that he falsified his August 2013 e-QIP when he answered
“No” to “Section 26: Financial Record: Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,”
thereby denying any delinquencies “in the past seven (7) years.  I find this to be a
knowing and wilful falsification.
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
3.a.  In May of 1989, Applicant was arrested for and charged with one count of
Selling Marijuana.  (Item 6 at page 2.)
3.b.  In October of 2006, Applicant was arrested for, and subsequently pled guilty
to, one count of Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs.  (Item 6 at page 2, and
Item 7 at page 2.)  As a result, he was fined $4,500 and placed on probation for five
years.  (Id.)
3.c.  In November of 2011, Applicant was again arrested for, and subsequently
pled guilty to, one count of Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs.  (Item 6 at
page 2, and Item 7 at page 2.)  As a result of this second conviction, he was fined
$5,000, sentenced to 15 days in jail, and placed on probation for five years.  (Id.)
Applicant is still on probation as a result of this conviction.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
3
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
4
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past due debts that
he has yet to address.  The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Subparagraph 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@  Applicant has failed to submit any documentation showing
that he has made a good-faith effort to address his significant past-due debts.  I can find
no other countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.  Financial
Considerations are found against the Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
The following Disqualifying Condition under Subparagraph 16(a) applies.  It
provides that the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar form used to conduct
investigations . . .” may be disqualifying.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating
Condition here, as the Applicant could have easily answered his e-QIP honestly, which
he certified as “true, complete, and correct.”  Personal Conduct is found against the
Applicant.
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
Paragraph 30 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern relating
to Criminal Conduct:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The adjudicative guidelines set out certain conditions that could raise security
concerns.  Paragraph 31(a) provides that “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses,” may raise security concerns.  He has two convictions within the last ten
years.  Paragraph 31(d) provides that where an “individual is currently on parole or
probation,@ may also raise security concerns.  Applicant is still on probation as a result
5
of his most recent conviction.  I find no mitigating condition that is applicable here.
Criminal Conduct is found against the Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me with
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising
from his Financial Considerations, Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.i. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a.~3.c. Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
