 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02101 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 26, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
14, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted documents that were marked AE L through O and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1987. He served in the U.S. military from 1975 until he was 
honorably discharged in 1980. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has 
held since 1987. He has a master’s degree. He is married for the second time with two 
adult children and an adult stepchild.1 
 
 Applicant overextended himself financially. He had a rental property, and the 
tenant did not pay rent for six to eight months. The tenant finally moved out leaving 
extensive damage to the property. Applicant also had to make repairs to the family 
home, and his children were in college. He had large balances on four credit card 
accounts. Applicant contracted with a law firm in June 2012 and enrolled the four debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d), totaling about $104,400, in the firm’s debt-resolution program. He 
continued to pay his other debts. Applicant established that the four SOR debts were 
settled or otherwise resolved.2  
 
 In September 2013, Applicant settled the $11,619 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for 
$6,971. He paid the settlement amount through 12 monthly payments of $580.3  
 
 In March 2014, Applicant and the bank holding the $20,443 debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a agreed to settle the debt for $11,700. Applicant made monthly payments toward 
the settlement until he made the final $4,875 payment in October 2014.4 
 
 Applicant settled the $24,836 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for a lump-sum payment 
of $12,418. He paid the full $12,418 in September 2014.5 
 
 The bank holding the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b issued an Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) Form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) in May 2013, which cancelled 
Applicant’s $42,441 debt. This created tax consequences, which Applicant reported in 
his 2013 income tax return. The 1099-C generated an additional tax bill of about 
$18,000. He paid $5,000 to the IRS with his income tax return, and he has been paying 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22, 33, 36-37; GE 1; AE I. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-22, 34; GE 1-4; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 21, 28-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A,-C, L, M. 
 
4 Tr. at 21, 23-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A, D-F, N, O. 
 
5 Tr. at 21, 31-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A, G. 
 
 
3 
 
$200 per month. Applicant anticipates receiving a bonus from his employer, which he 
will use to pay his remaining tax liability.6 
 
 Applicant has not received formal financial counseling, but his finances have 
greatly improved. He has not taken out new credit cards, and he adheres to a monthly 
budget. He credibly testified that he will pay his tax debt.7 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous documents attesting to his excellent job 
performance, ethics, and judgment. He has received multiple awards from his 
company.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 21-22, 26-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A, H. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
8 AE J, K. 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his financial obligations. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s finances suffered because of problems with his rental property, home 
repairs, and the expenses associated with children in college. He decided his best 
recourse was to engage the services of a law firm to assist him in addressing four large 
credit card accounts while he continued to pay his other debts. Since then, he settled 
three debts, and the bank cancelled the fourth. He credibly testified that he will continue 
with the payments to address the tax consequences of the cancelled debt.  
 
 I find that Applicant acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial problems are being resolved and are under control. They occurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. 
AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal applicability because problems with tenants are always possible 
with an investment property. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely applicable because 
Applicant is still in the process of paying his tax debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
6 
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, his favorable character 
evidence, and his long and stable work history. I also considered the steps Applicant 
has taken to resolve his financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
