 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03910 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 8, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On October 20, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR. In an email dated November 7, 2014, Applicant stated, “I 
 
2 
 
 
would like an administrative judge to issue a decision” in her case. In a telephone 
conversation with Applicant on November 24, 2014, Department Counsel confirmed that 
Applicant elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
December 17, 2014, Department Counsel compiled the Government’s File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) that contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9.  
 
On December 23, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any objections or 
any additional information within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 7, 2015, and submitted no matters within the allotted period. The case was 
assigned to me on March 16, 2015. Items 1 through 9 are entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She began working 
for that employer in December 2012. She graduated from high school in 1984 and 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 2007. She married for the second time in 2012 and has 
two adult children. She was granted a security clearance in 2007.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 12 delinquent debts totaling $21,857. In her 
answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated “I accept” in response to four allegations (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.h, and 1.l), indicated “I accept but deny responsibility” for three allegations 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j) and denied five allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.k). 
Credit reports in the record establish each of the alleged debts.2 
 
 Since 2002, Applicant was unemployed for three periods totaling about 13 
months. These periods include from about September 2004 to January 2005, from 
March to June 2005, and from February to May 2010. In her Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated February 27, 2013, she indicated that she 
left her job in September 2004 because she “Needed a break,” that she left her job in 
March 2005 to obtain a job with a government contractor, and that her self-employment 
ended in February 2010 due to a “bad economy.”3   
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.h – delinquent accounts totaling $2,816. In her answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated these accounts are from the same retail store and the total 
balance owed was $1,248. She indicated that she loaned her credit card to a friend who 
ran up the balance. She further indicated that she disputed the charges to no avail and 
that she would set up payment arrangements to resolve the issue. A review of 
Applicant’s credit reports supports her implication that these accounts are for the same 
debt. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.d. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h has a 
                                                          
1 Item 6. 
2 Items 1 and 4. 
3 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
date of last activity of 2008, was assigned for collection in February 2011, and remains 
unresolved.4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c – delinquent medical account totaling $198. In her answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated these accounts were for a surgical procedure. She indicated 
a doctor assured her that her insurance would cover the costs of the procedure. She 
also claimed that the doctor told her the bill would be written off if her insurance did not 
cover the costs. When her insurance did not pay the bill, she contacted the doctor’s 
office to ensure they coded the billing correctly. The insurance company then advised 
her that her insurance did not cover that surgical procedure. The doctor’s office said 
there was nothing they could do after Applicant advised them that the insurance 
company would not pay the bill. She also indicated the doctor’s office did not pre-certify 
the procedure, which she said they were required to do. She provided no 
documentation to substantiate the basis of her dispute. Insufficient evidence was 
provided to establish that steps are being taken to resolve these debts.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – charged-off account for $1,000. This debt was a credit card account 
that had a date of last activity of July 2010. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
indicated this debt was paid and referred to an attached credit report as proof. While the 
credit report indicated that the balance of the debt was zero, it also indicated it was 
charged off. Insufficient evidence was provided to establish that this debt was resolved.6  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $5,050. This was an installment loan that had 
a date of last activity of March 2010. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated this 
debt was paid and referred to an attached credit report as proof. The credit report 
merely reflected the balance was zero. I find this debt is resolved.7  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j – delinquent medical accounts totaling $12,238. A review 
of Applicant’s credit reports revealed that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j is a duplicate of the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.j. In her answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that, after being hit by a truck, she had a total knee replacement. She 
indicated that her doctor said her insurance would cover her medical bills except for her 
deductible. She said she paid the deductible. Because her medical bills were the result 
of someone else’s negligence, she indicated in her answer that she accepted these 
debts, but denied responsibility. She provided no documentation to substantiate the 
basis of her dispute. Insufficient evidence was provided to establish that steps are being 
taken to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i.8 
                                                          
4 Items 1, 4, 8, and 9.   
5 Items 1, 4, 8, and 9. 
6 Items 1, 4, 8, and 9.  
7 Items 1, 4, and 8.  
8 Items 1, 4, 8, and 9.  
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – medical collection account for $413. This debt had a date of last 
activity of August 2007. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that this debt was 
not listed on her credit report and she believed it was a billing error. A credit report (Item 
9) indicated that this account was paid. This debt is resolved.9  
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – medical collection account for $142. This debt was assigned for 
collection in March 2012. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that this debt 
arose when her son was injured in a motorcycle accident. Her ex-husband used her 
insurance for the medical expenses. She asked her ex-husband and son to pay this 
debt, but evidently neither of them did so. She indicated that she would resolve this 
debt. Insufficient evidence was provided to establish that steps are being taken to 
resolve this debt.10 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
                                                          
9 Items 1, 4, 8, and 9.  
10 Items 1, 4, 8, and 9.  
 
5 
 
 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay 
for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has multiple delinquent debts that remain unresolved. From the 
evidence presented, I am unable to find that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
Her financial problems continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
  Applicant was unemployed from February to May 2010 because of a bad 
economy. She was injured in a vehicle accident and had a total knee replacement. Her 
son was injured in a motorcycle accident. Her unemployment and the reported injuries 
were the result of conditions beyond her control that contributed to her financial 
problems. Nonetheless, she has failed to establish that she has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances in addressing her financial problems. She paid the debt in SOR 1.k, 
but provided no evidence of a meaningful track record of payments toward the other 
delinquent debts. No evidence was presented that she attempted to enter into 
repayment agreements with any creditors. She contests some of the debts, but provided 
no documentation to establish that she had a legitimate basis for disputing them or that 
she formally disputed them. No evidence of financial counseling was presented. From 
the evidence presented, I am unable to find that her financial problems are under 
 
7 
 
 
control or are being resolved. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.k, but not the remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(e) do not 
apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.11 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. In general, Applicant failed 
to establish that she acted responsibly in the handling of her financial problems. 
Following the “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, doubt about 
granting Applicant eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national 
security. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.g-1.i:    Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 The nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
