 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01181 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s charged-off or in 
collection accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), totaling approximately 
$20,000, and student loans totaling approximately $47,000, have been included in a 
debt consolidation plan. The financial considerations security concerns have been 
resolved. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 4, 2014, 
the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
security clearance. On June 30, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing. On August 28, 2014, I was assigned the case. On October 2, 2013, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing convened on October 20, 2014. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 
through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, without objection. Applicant testified at 
the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. Additional documents (Ex. J through N) were submitted and admitted into 
the record without objection. On October 28, 2014, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied two debts (SOR 1.f, $232 and SOR 
1.j, $1,385) and admitted the remaining charged-off or in collection accounts. He 
indicated his financial difficulties were the result of his father’s July 2007 death and his 
mother-in-law’s July 2008 death. In April 2013, his income decreased due to DoD 
budget cuts when his overtime pay was stopped. (Tr. 44) I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old acceptance technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2008, and seeks to maintain a secret security clearance. 
(Tr. 22, 32) Applicant called no witnesses other than himself. He provided his last five 
performance reports. His supervisors indicate he is extremely hard working, an 
exceptional technician, is willing to take on more work as required, a great team player, 
learns quickly, has a wonderful work ethic, and has a “let’s get it done attitude.” (Ex. H) 
Applicant’s pastor states Applicant is an excellent role model and a person of good 
moral character. (Ex. J)  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $43,000. (Tr. 22, 44) He is married and has a 23-
year-old daughter. (Tr. 22, 23, 42) In September 2012, Applicant’s wife graduated from 
college with an associate’s degree in medical billing and coding. (Tr. 52) His wife is not 
currently working outside the home, but is seeking employment. (Tr. 22, 41, 56) In 
addition to Applicant’s full-time DoD contractor job, he has a part-time job working 20 to 
25 hours weekly for a building supply store. (Ex. I, Tr. 27, 45) In June 2013, he started 
his part-time job following the loss of overtime pay at his DoD contractor job, which 
occurred in April 2013. (Tr. 44) He asserts he is getting approximately four hours of 
sleep a night. (Tr. 27) Before obtaining his current part-time job, he had a five-month 
part-time job as an overnight grocery stocker. (Tr. 57)  
 
 In June 2007, Applicant’s father died and in July 2008, his mother-in-law died. 
(Tr. 11) He was responsible for the funeral expenses, which were approximately $5,000 
each. (Tr. 23, 34) His mother is on disability. Even though he has siblings, the funeral 
expenses accrued to him. (Tr. 35) In November 2008, he started working full time for his 
current employer after his mother-in-law’s death. (Tr. 31) He maintained contact with his 
creditors when he began to fall behind on his monthly payments. (Tr.48)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 In June 2014, the $232 collection account (SOR 1.f) was “settled in full.” (Ex. F) 
The $1,385 collection account (SOR 1.j) has been deleted from Applicant’s credit file. 
(Ex. E) He acknowledged the other collection account (SOR 1.k, $623) with the same 
collection agency is his debt. The $5,108 charged-off account (SOR 1.n) was settled for 
$508.88 and payment made on the settlement. (Ex. G)  
 
 From 2004 through 2006, Applicant attended school to obtain his associate’s 
degree in computer and electronics engineering technology. (Tr. 36) He incurred 
$47,000 in student loans. (Tr. 35) In 2007, he initially fell behind on his monthly 
payments due to his father’s death. (Tr. 37) In 2009 and 2010, he made $400 payments 
for five months. (Tr. 40) He stated he is currently making $100 monthly payments on his 
student loans. (Tr. 38) He has included his student loans in a debt management 
program (DMP). (Ex. D, Tr. 38, 42) He asserted he had a letter documenting the 
amount owed on his student loans. It was suggested he might want to provide that 
documentation following the hearing. (Tr. 43) No document was received.  
 
 In July 2014, Applicant began discussion with the DMP and enrolled with the 
company in August 2014. (Ex. A, Tr. 47) The DMP was to address approximately 
$9,500 of Applicant’s $105,000 of debt. (Ex. A) The program requires him to make $345 
monthly payments to the company starting on September 25, 2014. (Ex. A) Changes to 
the DMP increased the monthly amount to $495. (Ex. K) The DMP required a monthly 
electronic funds transfer on the 25th of each month. (Ex. H, Tr. 49 and 57) He has made 
the following payments to the DMP company: $445 (August 26, 2014), $102 
(September 22, 2014), $345 (October 3, 2014), $48 (October 17, 2014), and $460 
(October 28, 2014). (Ex. A, N, Tr. 23) The program requires a complete financial 
assessment and the development of action plans.  
 
All the unaddressed SOR delinquent accounts were included in the DMP. (Ex. A, 
B) The company receives $50 monthly for the service it provides. (Tr. 25) He asserted 
his monthly payments would increase to $460 with the inclusion of the debt listed in 
SOR 1.k. (Tr. 25) With the inclusion of the debt in SOR 1.p ($688), his monthly payment 
increased to $495. (Tr. 58) Applicant asserts the $681 charged-off account in SOR 1.q 
and the $688 collection account in SOR 1.p are the same payday loan obligation. (Tr. 
59) 
 
 Applicant took on-line financial counseling courses from the DMP, from which he 
learned how to manage and control his finances. (Tr. 60) He asserts he is doing 
everything he possibly can to resolve his debts. (Tr. 61) He currently has $1,000 in his 
checking account. (Tr. 65) He is current on his two car payments, one for $502 monthly 
and the other for $360, on his 2007 and 2011 vehicles. (Tr. 28, 51) He is current on his 
rent ($840) and utility bills. (Tr. 27, 50) He has a credit card with a $200 limit, which he 
obtained to help him reestablish his credit. (Tr. 28) He has $13,600 in his company’s 
401(k) retirement plan. (Ex. L, M, Tr. 29) He is enrolled in 401(k) plans with his DoD 
contractor job and with his part-time job. (Ex. L, M) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant owed approximately 
$20,000 on collection accounts and charged-off accounts and also owed approximately 
$47,000 in student loan obligations. At one point, he was behind on his student loan 
payments and some have been charged off. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems commenced with the death of this father in 2007 
and continued with the death of his mother-in-law in 2008. In 2013, DoD budget 
constraints eliminated his overtime pay. When he lost his overtime pay, he obtained a 
part-time job and maintains a part-time job whereby he works 20 to 25 hours weekly. 
Some of the delinquent accounts are not recently incurred, but there are multiple 
accounts that remain unpaid. He has entered into a DMP which includes all of the SOR 
debt.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were aggravated by the 
financial obligations brought on by his father and mother-in-law’s deaths. These 
financial obligations will not recur. When the problems arose and he began to get 
behind on his payments, he acted reasonably by keeping in contact with his creditors. 
AG ¶ 20(a) and AG & 20(b) apply. 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling through the DMP and it appears he is 
getting his delinquent debt under control. He is current on his rent, utility bills, vehicle 
payments, and his credit card, which has a $200 limit. AG & 20 (c) applies. 
 
Applicant settled and paid two of the SOR delinquent obligations and all of the 
remaining obligations, including his student loans, are now part of a DMP. The program 
requires him to pay $495 monthly, which is made by a monthly electronic funds transfer 
on the 25th of each month. He provided documentation showing payments are being 
made to the DMP. He has received financial classes, maintains a budget, is living within 
his means, and is paying his currently obligations. He is addressing the SOR debts in 
the DMP. AG & 20(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
types that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The delinquent debts set forth in the 
SOR were not incurred on luxuries, the largest debt was for student loans. His duty 
performance is excellent. 
 
When Applicant’s financial problems started, due to the deaths of his father and 
mother-in-law, he kept his creditors informed. When a cut back at work eliminated his 
overtime pay, he immediately sought part-time employment. Since early 2013, Applicant 
has been maintaining two jobs. He works 40 hours on his DoD contractor job and 20 to 
25 hours weekly on his part-time job. He does not have much time for anything else, 
including sleep, which he says is about four hours nightly. A person does not take a 
second job unless they are serious about addressing past-due, delinquent accounts. He 
asserted he was doing everything he could to address his debts. His part-time job gives 
credence to that claim.  
 
An applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt 
listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan 
to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I 
must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and realistic. 
 
Applicant has included all of the SOR debt in a debt management program and 
the monthly payment is automatically made. He has made sufficient payments on that 
agreement that I am confident that the automatic monthly deduction will continue until 
all of the obligations listed in the plan have been paid. The issue is not simply whether 
all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1. v:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
