 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03411 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 20, 2014, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) as revised by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on 
August 30, 2006, which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether 
her clearance should granted. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2014. She elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 10, 2014, was 
provided to her by letter dated November 17, 2014. Applicant received the FORM 
on December 1, 2014. She was given 30 days to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit any 
information within that time period. The case was assigned to me on February 4, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of 
the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old geographic information systems technician, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since January 2014. She seeks a security 
clearance in conjunction with her current employment. (Item 4.) 
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in August 2007, and was 
awarded a master’s degree in June 2012. She is not married and does not have 
any dependents. Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (Item 4.) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
The SOR alleged eight allegations under this concern. The debts and 
status of those debts are:  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g – Seven separate past-due student loans in the 
respective amounts of $15,295, $14,073, $9,143, $8,500, 8,500, $7,185, and 
$4,277, totaling $66,973. Applicant provided documentation that she consolidated 
her student loans and has been making payments since at least November 2013. 
ACCOUNTS BEING RESOLVED. SOR ¶ 1.h – Collection account owed for 
library fines in the amount of $448. ACCOUNT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties stem from her inability to find full-time 
employment after completing graduate school. In short, she lacked the necessary 
income to pay her debts. Once she began her current job and earned a living 
wage, she was able to repay her student loans. Applicant also has a part-time job 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to pay down her outstanding debt. She is unable to pay her library fines at this 
time due to lack of income, but intends to do so when able. (Item 3.) There is no 
evidence of financial counseling. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national 
security emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of 
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the 
Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole 
person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 
12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or 
implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, 
conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may 
disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The 
Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue her security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts 
to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence 
presented. The Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not 
isolated. Her debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives 
partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur and her behavior does not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant experienced a 
lengthy period of unemployment. Once she began earning income and had the 
means to pay her debts, she consolidated her seven student loans and began 
making payments at least ten months before receiving her SOR. As noted above  
and apart from her library fine, seven out of eight of Applicant’s debts are being 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
resolved and she has made substantial progress in regaining financial 
responsibility.1 
  
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is fully applicable. 
Applicant made a good-faith effort to address financial concerns alleged. She is 
systematically repaying all but one of her debts and intends to repay her unpaid 
debt when she has the resources to do so. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However, further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor weighs heavily in her 
favor. She is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. She is 
current on her day-to-day expenses, lives within her means, and her SOR debts 
have been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a 
key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has 
since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 
05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 
2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether she maintained contact with her creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep her debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has 
paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is 
that an applicant demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve [her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and [her] actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction 
of [her] outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered 
in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan 
provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide 
for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s student loans are being repaid and she will repay her library 
fines when she is able to do so. It is clear from the record that she was unable to 
repay her student loans because she was unemployed. Now that she has a 
steady income stream, Applicant is addressing her responsibilities. To her credit, 
she began repaying her student loans at least ten months before her SOR was 
issued and she also has a part-time job to generate additional income. Due to 
circumstances beyond her control, her debts became delinquent. Despite her 
financial setback as a result of being unemployed, it is clear from Applicant’s 
actions that she is on the road to financial recovery. These factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person 
analysis support a favorable decision. I specifically considered the circumstances 
that led to her financial difficulties, her financial recovery, the steps she has taken 
to resolve her financial situation, her potential for future service as a defense 
contractor, and the mature and responsible manner in which she dealt with her 
situation. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the 
facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude she has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  For Applicant 
    
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
