 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00321 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by her history of not meeting 
financial obligations. Although her financial problems relate, in part, to periods of 
unemployment and underemployment, she has been employed full time since 2011 and 
failed to establish that her financial situation is under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline (Guideline F).1 On May 5, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR, affirmatively waived her right to a hearing, and requested 
a decision regarding her suitability for a clearance on the written record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 30, 2014, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed 
findings of fact, argument, and eight exhibits. Applicant did not submit a response to the 
FORM within the allotted 30-day period.  
 
 On March 10, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case and sua sponte opened the 
record to provide her a final opportunity to submit a response to the FORM and provide 
any additional matters in support of her case.2 On March 17, 2015, Applicant submitted 
a Response and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 8 
and Ax. A are admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact:3 
 
 Applicant is in her forties and is married. She has three children, who range in 
ages from 14 to 25. She earned an associate’s degree in 2005, and her bachelor’s 
degree in 2013. She was unemployed for a year from October 2010 to October 2011. In 
October 2011, she secured a job as a federal contractor and was granted a clearance at 
the confidential level. She has been with her current employer since August 2013. She 
is employed as a financial analyst.  
 
 In August 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). She 
disclosed several of her delinquent debts, to include two judgments and a substantial 
debt for a repossessed car. The SOR lists seven delinquent debts, including the two 
judgments and the car debt. Applicant admits all the SOR debts, except a $480 
collection account (1.c). The $480 collection account is reflected on a credit report 
Applicant submitted with her Answer.  
 
Applicant states that she satisfied the two judgments listed on her SOR (1.a and 
1.b). The judgments are for payday loans that she took out to help pay other debts. She 
did not pay back the loans and the creditors secured judgments. Applicant has insisted 
throughout the security clearance process that both judgments were satisfied through 
wage garnishment. She did not submit documentation to corroborate her claim, but 
Department Counsel notes that Gx. 7, a credit report, supports Applicant’s position that 
the 2009 judgment (1.a) was paid.4 Applicant also claims she paid a $100 delinquent 
medical debt (1.f), but did not submit documentation to support her claim.  
 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, which has been included and made a part of the record. 
 
3 In reaching the above findings of fact, I have made only those reasonable inferences supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence. 
 
4 FORM at 3.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s largest SOR debt is for a charged-off account of over $11,500 (1.g). 
The debt is for her car that was repossessed in about 2007 (car debt). Applicant 
anticipates the car debt will be removed from her credit report in the near future. She 
submitted no evidence regarding efforts to resolve the car debt. She also did not submit 
evidence of efforts to resolve a $620 collection account (1.e), or information regarding 
the debt’s current status. She states that a separate collection account for $370 (1.d) 
was removed from her credit report, but did not provide information whether such action 
by the credit agency was due to payment of the debt or other reason. SOR debts 1.c, 
1.d, 1.e, and 1.g, which together total over $13,000, remain unresolved.  
 
Applicant states her financial problems were a result of a period of unsteady 
employment before securing a contractor position in October 2011. She has conducted 
research on repairing her credit. At one point, Applicant’s delinquent debts included her 
student loans. She defaulted on her student loans, but rehabilitated the loans and they 
are now current. (Response) She submitted a credit report with her Answer, which 
notes that her student loan accounts are current. The credit report also reflects that she 
has been late paying her car loan in the recent past. Other than the credit report, 
Applicant did not submit information regarding her current income, expenses, or other 
evidence regarding her current finances.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
 
4 
 
 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5 However, there is no per se rule requiring 
disqualification, as a judge must decide each case based on its own merits.6 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding an individual with financial problems is explained 
at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $13,000 in 
unresolved delinquent debt raises this concern. The evidence also establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
                                                          
5 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
6 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”7 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
Applicant incurred a substantial amount of delinquent debt because of 
unemployment and underemployment. She resolved her student loans after being hired 
as a federal contractor, but despite full-time employment since 2011 has yet to address 
a number of past-due debts. These unresolved debts include a considerable car debt 
that she incurred in 2007. Her delinquent debts are substantial and ongoing.8 
Applicant’s failure to address her longstanding debts undercuts the favorable evidence 
of responsible conduct in resolving other debt. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply, and AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies.  
 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 12-11660 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 9, 2014) (“In light of the absence of corroboration of 
Applicant’s statements that he had paid his debts, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s 
financial problems were still ongoing.”); ISCR Case No. 11-13507 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2013) (“unpaid 
delinquent debts constitute a continuing course of conduct, thereby undermining a conclusion that the 
debts are not recent within the meaning of the Directive.”). 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is waiting for the remaining SOR debts to fall off her credit report. She 
only satisfied the two payday loan judgments after the creditors garnished her pay. 
Disregarding a lawful debt or satisfying a debt under such circumstances does not 
amount to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors. Applicant has accomplished 
some self-study to improve her credit and her employment as a financial analyst 
indicates that she likely has some understanding of the principles of financial 
management. However, other than a credit report from May 2014, she did not submit 
evidence from which a favorable finding regarding her current finances could be made. 
Individuals are expected to submit documentation or other substantial evidence 
regarding their efforts to resolve SOR debts or to substantiate their dispute of a debt, as 
well as evidence of financial reform and rehabilitation.9 Applicant failed to meet her 
burden of persuasion and production. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I hereby incorporate my above comments and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant voluntarily disclosed some of 
her delinquent debts on her SCA, which speaks favorably as to her credibility. She 
resolved other debt after regaining full-time employment, which tends to indicate that 
she is starting to put her financial house in order. However, her history of not meeting 
financial obligations and lack of evidence regarding her current finances, raise doubts 
about her present financial situation. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of national 
security.11 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about her 
current eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.f:        For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g:        Against Applicant 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008). 
 
10 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“The Directive requires a Judge to resolve any 
doubt in favor of national security.”) (citing, Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b)). 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
