 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ADP Case No. 14-02699 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges a bankruptcy, three delinquent 
collection debts, and a state tax lien totaling $17,752. On June 27, 2014, her husband 
satisfied the state tax lien for $16,371, which constituted 92 percent of their delinquent 
SOR debt. She and her husband have three remaining SOR debts totaling $1,381 to 
resolve. Her debts resulted from unemployment, underemployment, and medical 
problems. She promised to pay her SOR debts when her financial circumstances 
improve. She has a track record of paying her current debts and expenses. Financial 
considerations concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 6, 2013, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 4) On August 1, 2014, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with national 
security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which 
entails access to sensitive information. (HE 2) The DOD CAF recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether such access to sensitive information 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1)  
 
On August 28, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated December 15, 2014, was provided to her on January 7, 2015. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and provided 
mitigating information. (Item 2) Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old medical-referral specialist, who has been working with 
medical records since February 2013.2 She was unemployed from July to December 
2012. Otherwise, she was employed from 1999 to present. She has never served in the 
military. She married in 1990, and she has five children, who were born in 1985, 1987, 
1992, 1994, and 1997. She graduated from high school in 1990, and she has taken 
some college courses. (Item 8) There is no evidence of reportable criminal offenses, 
alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of her employment rules.  
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her March 6, 2013 SF 86, 
three credit reports, SOR response, and FORM response. (Items 2, 4-7) Her SOR 
alleges a bankruptcy in 2007, three delinquent collection debts, and a state tax lien 
totaling $17,752. On June 27, 2014, her husband paid the state tax lien for $16,371, 
and she and her husband have three debts totaling $1,381 to resolve. 
 
In 2007, Applicant and her husband’s debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of 
the Bankruptcy Code. About $10,000 in debt was discharged. (Item 8) Applicant’s 
husband failed to file their state income tax return in 2003. (Item 4) On March 13, 2009, 
the state obtained a judgment and lien and began garnishing $1,200 monthly from her 
husband’s pay. (Items 2, 4) She has not had formal credit counseling. The state filed a 
lien satisfaction debt on June 27, 2014. (Item 2) Applicant and her husband paid some 
non-SOR debts. (Items 5-6, 8) 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s March 6, 2013 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant explained she is “currently in the process of paying” the credit card 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($614) and 1.d ($518) “to show [her] responsibility and 
trustworthiness.” (Items 2, 8) She was unaware of the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.e 
($249); however, she promised to diligently seek to resolve it. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant was unable to work for more than a month in the last half of 2014 
because of “a near stroke.”3 She lost pay and had medical bills to address. Her medical 
problems have delayed her resolution of some of her debts. She enjoys her work and 
assisting military personnel and their families with their medical issues. She promised to 
continue to work on her outstanding SOR debts and to maintain and establish her 
financial responsibility. She has a good work record with her current employer; she has 
received extensive training from her employer, and she believes she is an asset to the 
DOD contractor.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                            
3 The facts in the paragraph are from Applicant’s February 11, 2015 FORM response. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
      
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her SF 
86, credit reports, SOR response, and FORM response. Applicant’s SOR alleges a 
bankruptcy, three delinquent collection debts, and a state tax lien totaling $17,752. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
  AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(c) are applicable. Resolution of Applicant’s SOR debts has 
been delayed by unemployment, underemployment, and Applicant’s medical problems. 
Applicant’s husband paid their state tax debt through wage garnishment.5 On June 27, 
2014, her husband satisfied the state tax lien for $16,371, which constituted 92 percent 
of their delinquent SOR debt. She and her husband have three remaining SOR debts 
totaling $1,381 to resolve. She and her husband paid some non-SOR debts. Applicant 
did not provide evidence that she established and maintained contact with some of her 
creditors.6   
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal Board 
addressed a situation where an applicant, who had been sporadically unemployed and 
lacked the ability to pay his creditors, noting that “it will be a long time at best before he 
                                            
5Of course, Applicant loses some mitigating credit because her and her husband’s state tax debt 
payments were made through garnishment of her husband’s salary even though her opportunity to 
establish a payment plan was limited because of her limited income and other financial commitments. 
Payment of a debt “though garnishment rather than a voluntary effort diminishes its mitigating force.” 
Compare ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2010) with ISCR Case No. 04-07360 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006) (payment of two of four debts through garnishment did not bar mitigation of 
financial considerations concerns). 
  
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
has paid” all of his creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment compensation 
at the time of his hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a circumstance was 
not necessarily a bar to having access to classified information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
  Applicant has not accrued any new delinquent debt since obtaining her present 
employment in 2013. Her illness, loss of employment, and underemployment are 
circumstances largely beyond her control. She understands what she must do to 
establish and maintain her financial responsibility.7 Applicant admitted responsibility for 
and took reasonable and responsible actions to resolve as much of her debts as was 
possible based on her circumstances. There are clear indications the problem is being 
resolved and is under control. Her efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                            
7The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old medical-referral specialist, who has been working with 
medical records since February 2013. She graduated from high school in 1990, and she 
has taken some college courses. There is no evidence of reportable criminal offenses, 
alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of her employment rules. She is sufficiently mature 
to understand and comply with her public trust responsibilities. There is every indication 
that she is loyal to the United States, the DOD, and her employer.   
 
Applicant is credited with admitting responsibility for her delinquent debts on her 
SF 86. On June 27, 2014, her husband satisfied the state tax lien for $16,371. She and 
her husband have three remaining SOR debts totaling $1,381 to resolve. Her illness, 
loss of employment, and underemployment contributed to her financial problems. These 
are all circumstances largely beyond her control. The Appeal Board has addressed a 
key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. She has paid or kept current all of the debts that have occurred 
while she has been employed. Her husband paid their delinquent state tax debt. She 
took reasonable actions under her particular financial circumstances to address her 
delinquent debts. Her overall history shows a “meaningful track record” of debt 
repayment. I am confident she will continue her establishment and maintenance of her 
financial responsibility, and pay her last three SOR debts when she is able to do so.8  
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I 
conclude financial considerations concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for a public trust 
position is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
                                            
8Of course, the Government may re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of access to sensitive information now does 
not bar the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to 
reconsider [trustworthiness] significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative [trustworthiness] significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). 
Violation of a promise made in a [trustworthiness] context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment 
concerns under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a public trust position. An 
administrative judge does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board 
has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary [public trust position] to allow her the 
opportunity to have a [public trust position] while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote 
does not imply that this Applicant’s public trust position is conditional. 
