1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02571
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Michael Klopfer, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns generated by his history of problem
alcohol consumption. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on October 7, 2014, admitting all of the allegations
and requesting a hearing. On December 1, 2014, the case was assigned to me. On
December 3, 2014, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for January 14,
2
2015.  At the hearing, I received four Government exhibits marked as Government
Exhibit (GE) 1 through 4, in addition to five Applicant exhibits marked as Applicant’s
Exhibits (AE A - AE E). Also, I took administrative notice (Hearing Exhibit I), at
Department Counsel’s request, of a discovery letter mailed to Applicant, and I
considered the testimony of Applicant and a character witness. 
The hearing was not completed by the close of the business day. Therefore, I
scheduled its completion for January 22, 2015. That day, I considered the testimony of
another Applicant witness and received another Applicant exhibit (AE F). I received the
transcript from the first part of the hearing (Tr. I) on January 23, 2015 and I received the
transcript for part two of the hearing (Tr. II) on January 30, 2015.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old single man. Three previous marriages ended in
divorce. His most recent marriage ended in 2008. Applicant is a high school graduate
and has earned some college credits. He served honorably in the U.S. Marine Corps
from 2004 through his retirement in 2004. Since 2009, he has worked as an aircraft
mechanic for a defense contractor. (GE 3 at 4) He has continuously held a security
clearance for 30 years. (Tr. I at 21)
Applicant has a history of problem alcohol consumption. In 2003, Applicant
confided to his officer-in-charge that he was having serious marital and drinking
problems. (Tr. I at 22) Applicant was drinking approximately a six-pack of beer three
nights per week. The officer-in-charge then talked to the commanding officer, who
ordered him to undergo a substance abuse evaluation. (Tr. I at 23) 
Applicant underwent a substance evaluation, as ordered, and was diagnosed as
alcohol dependent. (Tr. 24) Also, the clinician recommended that he attend a 12-week
outpatient rehabilitation program. Applicant completed the program as recommended.
(Tr. I at 24) As part of his Applicant’s rehabilitation, he attended Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) sessions five days per week for eight months. (AE 2 at 3; Tr. 48) Applicant
abstained from alcohol for approximately 18 months, then resumed drinking in late
2004, consuming a 12-pack of beer per weekend. (Tr. 50) Applicant attributes the
resumption of his alcohol use to the revelation that his second wife was having an affair.
(Tr. I at 52) 
In September 2008, a coworker reported Applicant to their supervisor after
Applicant came to work smelling like alcohol. Subsequently, Applicant voluntarily
entered a 14-day inpatient alcohol treatment facility. (Tr. I at 55) He was again
evaluated with alcohol dependence. (Tr. 56) He then stopped drinking alcohol for the
next two months. In January 2009, Applicant’s employer fired him, prompting Applicant
to resume drinking. (Tr. I at 59) 
One evening in May 2009, Applicant left his girlfriend’s house after a heated
argument and attempted to drive home. He had been drinking alcohol earlier while at
It is unclear from the record whether the therapist’s doctorate is in psychology or counseling.1
3
his girlfriend’s house. Subsequently, a police officer stopped him, and after
administering a breathalyzer, charged him with the following:
1) driving/attempting to drive while under the influence (DWI); 
2) driving/attempting to drive while impaired by alcohol per se; and
 
3) driving/attempting to drive while under the influence per se 
Applicant pleaded guilty to the second charge and received probation before
judgment. Per the terms of the probation Applicant was to abstain from drinking alcohol.
(Tr. 25) Also, Applicant’s driver’s license was suspended for 90 days or until he installed
an ignition interlock, he was required to use the ignition interlock system for a year. (AE
3 at 14) The remaining charges were nolle prossed. (Tr. I at 61)
After the arrest, Applicant, upon the recommendation of his attorney, attended
approximately 12 weeks of alcohol-related counseling. Applicant remained abstinent for
six to eight months after the arrest. (Tr. I at 82) When he resumed drinking, his alcohol
consumption consisted of an occasional drink with dinner and a 12-pack of beer over
the course of a day on weekends. (Tr. I at 37; GE 3 at 15) His live-in girlfriend
characterizes this drinking as not as heavy as it was before the DUI arrest. (Tr. I at 37) 1
Applicant quit drinking again in August 2014. He has been abstinent since then.
(AE F at 2) Applicant does not consider himself to be an alcoholic. (Tr. 63) However, he
acknowledges that he used alcohol to help him with stress and wants “to break that
cycle.” (Tr. 62)
Since October 2014, Applicant has been evaluated by three therapists from three
separate counseling centers. On October 7, 2014, he met with a certified alcohol and
drug counselor to develop a treatment regime. (AE A at 1) The counselor evaluated him
and concluded that he was not dependent on alcohol. In support of ths conclusion, he
reasoned that Applicant did not suffer from physical or psychological withdrawal
symptoms, and was thriving personally and professionally. Moreover, Applicant’s past
issues with depression and insomnia, problems which sometimes prompted him to self-
medicate with alcohol, were under control. (AE A at 3) Ultimately, he declined to
develop a treatment regime, concluding that “no treatment [was] necessary.” (AE A at 1)
Applicant has been engaged in weekly therapy with a licensed therapist since
October 23, 2014. (AE C)  She is helping him cope with his depression and helping him
“feel better about [him]self,” by “getting a lot of things out in the open.” (Tr. I at 41) This
therapist testified. Referencing the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual for Psychological Disorders, she diagnosed Applicant as non-dependent on
alcohol. (Tr. II at 17, 30) Specifically, since Applicant has been undergoing therapy with
her, he has been abstinent, he has not been preoccupied with trying to obtain alcohol,
4
and he has not experienced withdrawal symptoms. (Tr. II at 18) Also, she noted
Applicant’s current social stability - maintaining a long-term relationship with his
girlfriend, excelling on the job, and successfully managing his money - as indicia of non-
dependence on alcohol. (Tr. II at 15)
On December 23, 2014, Applicant met with the program director, a licensed
alcohol counselor with a Ph.D, of another treatment facility. After “a very intense,
demanding evaluation,” the therapist found no evidence that Applicant was unstable.
(AE B at 2)  
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
Under this guideline, “excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 21). Counselors have
evaluated Applicant with alcohol dependence twice between 2003 and 2008. Applicant’s
drinking problem led to a DUI arrest in 2009, and he has relapsed three times after
therapists recommended that he not drink alcohol.
 The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 apply:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
5
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical social
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program;
and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23(a) are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of . . .  abstinence in
accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in
meetings of AA or a similar organization and has received a favorable
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment
program.
The length of time Applicant has struggled with alcohol addiction, his history of
relapses and the recency of the time that he has been abstinent renders AG ¶ 23(a)
inapplicable. Applicant has been abstinent from alcohol use for seven months. He has
been evaluated by three therapists, all of whom concluded that he is either non-
dependent on alcohol, or that his dependence is in remission. With the help of the
therapist with whom he continues to receive weekly treatment, he has learned to
manage his stress and his depression, the principal triggers that cause him to want to
drink alcohol. Under these circumstances AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d) apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
6
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant has been sober for seven months. This is not a particularly long time
given his history of alcohol abuse and relapses. Conversely, the presence of
rehabilitation is extraordinary, as three therapists from three separate treatment centers
have concluded unequivocally that he is no longer alcohol dependent. Moreover,
despite no longer being alcohol dependent, Applicant recognizes that his past issues
with depression and anxiety triggered his desire to drink alcohol, and is prospectively
addressing these issues even though they are currently not posing any problems. The
presence of rehabilitation, together with the length of time Applicant has held a security
clearance, is sufficient to outweigh the negative security inference generated by his
history of relapse and the relatively recent period of time that he has been abstinent
from alcohol. Considering this case in the context of the whole-person concept, I
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
7
