 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01880 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has made a 
good-faith effort to resolve the $29,000 in delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. To date, 
he has paid $11,000 toward the resolution of his delinquent debt. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 17, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on December 17, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted AE E through H, which I admitted without objection.3 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 61, has worked as a technician in a research laboratory since 1971. 
He previously held a clearance in the early 1980s. He currently earns $85,000 annually. 
On his January 2014 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed one delinquent 
account. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant was indebted to six creditors 
for approximately $29,000 in delinquent accounts.4  
 
 Applicant is the older of two children. In 2005, Applicant began providing financial 
support to his parents. At first, Applicant provided $4,000 to $5,000 in financial support 
annually. In 2007, when his younger brother died, Applicant became the only source of 
financial help for his parents, now 83 and 84 years old. The cost of their medications 
exceeds their income, so Applicant covers their expenses. For the past four years, 
Applicant has provided between $10,000 and $12,000 annually in financial assistance 
to his parents. When his brother died, he left behind a wife and five children. Applicant 
paid his brother’s funeral expenses. Around the same time, his oldest daughter divorced 
her husband. She began to suffer from severe depression, which required 
hospitalization. For the next eight years, Applicant and his wife became the de facto 
guardians of their seven-year-old granddaughter. All the while, Applicant and his wife 
were also paying the college tuition for their youngest daughter, which was $50,000 per 
year. The increased responsibilities caused a strain on Applicant’s finances. As a result, 
Applicant and his wife began relying on credit cards and loans to pay all of their 
expenses.5  
 
Although Applicant still provides significant financial support to his parents, his 
expenses have stabilized. Applicant’s older daughter has returned to work and resumed 
her role as primary care giver for her now 16-year-old daughter. Although they remain 
part of Applicant’s household, he does not provide any other financial support. 
Applicant’s youngest daughter graduated from college in 2008. She is working and has 
recently married. She no longer relies on Applicant for financial support.6  
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 Department Counsel’s e-mail regarding the admissibility of the AE E-H is included in the record as HE II.  
 
4 Tr. 20-23; GE 1-3. 
 
5 Tr. 18-20, 23-28, 41-43; Answer.  
 
6 Tr. 43-44; Answer. 
 
3 
 
In 2013, Applicant began to resolve his delinquent debt. Between December 
2013 and November 2014, Applicant paid $4,100 toward the resolution of the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($4,700) and 1.b ($4,900), which are held by the same creditor. 
As of December 2014, both accounts are reported as being current on his most recent 
credit report. During the same period, he also paid $4,800 toward the resolution of SOR 
¶ 1.d ($17,300). Applicant has paid in full the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
($1,000) and 1.g ($170). He also claims to have paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
($260) and 1.f ($720), but has been unable to obtain receipts from the creditors.  
Applicant lives within his means and is able to maintain the payment plans he has 
arranged with the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b, and 1.d.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
7 Tr. 28-40. 44-46; AE A-E. 
 
4 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $29,000 in delinquent debt. 
The debts are also substantiated by the record.9 Between 2008 and 2013, Applicant 
demonstrated a history of not paying his bills as well as an inability to do so.10 However, 
Applicant has submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised 
by his finances. Applicant’s financial problems do not cast doubt on his current security 
worthiness. His financial problems were not caused by irresponsible or reckless 
behavior, but by the unexpected and overwhelming demands of having to provide 
financial support to three generations of family members simultaneously: his parents, 
his two daughters, and his granddaughter. Over the past year, Applicant has made a 
good-faith effort to rehabilitate and resolve his delinquent accounts, efforts that began 
well in advance of the issuance of the SOR. To date, he has paid over $11,000 toward 
the resolution of his delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 1.d-1.e, and 1.e). Given 
Applicant’s track record of debt repayment, I find his testimony that he has paid the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f credible. Applicant’s finances are now stable and 
under control and he is able to maintain his current payment plans.11 
 
I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. 
In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 
                                                          
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 GE 2-3. 
 
10 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
11 See  AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (c)-(d).  
 
5 
 
2(a). Applicant’s brief period of financial problems is not indicative of financial 
irresponsibility, poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules 
and regulations. He has also established a positive track record of debt repayment, as 
well as financial rehabilitation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
