                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-03067           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On October 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 10, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 29, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on
February 25, 2015.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GEs
1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and six exhibits (AEs A-F). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on March 9, 2015. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated one delinquent debt for
$17,713. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation pertaining to the
debt covered by subparagraph 1.a. He claimed this medical debt arose out of a car
accident in which he was struck by a vehicle while rushing to protect his four-year-old
son. Applicant accepted full responsibility for the debt and claimed he had begun to make
payments to discharge the debt. He claimed he is a very trustworthy person who takes
his assigned job duties very seriously.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old office manager specialist for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in 2009 and has three children from this marriage: two stepsons
from his wife’s previous marriage (ages 8 and 7) and one son (age 4). (GE1; Tr. 39) He
earned two years of college credits from a local community college and claimed no
military service. (GE 1; Tr. 53-55)
Applicant’s finances
In August 2011, Applicant was involved in a major accident while racing to a cross-
walk to rescue his young son from approaching vehicles who had entered the crosswalk
zone. (AEs D and E; Tr. 31) Following the accident, Applicant and his son were
transported to a local hospital for evaluation and treatment. (AE E; Tr. 31) 
For the two days that Applicant and his son were hospitalized, Applicant was billed
a total of $17,713. (AE F) Fully insured at the time of the accident, he expected his
medical expenses to be covered by his insurance policy. (Tr. 44-45) 
Shortly after Applicant was discharged from the local hospital that treated him, he
relocated and never received a bill from the hospital. (Tr.  32-35, 40) He only learned of
the amount owing from the interviewing agent of the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM), some two years after the bill’s issuance. (Tr. 31, 45) Once he learned of the still
outstanding debt, he tried to obtain additional funds from his insurer. (Tr. 32-33) He was
told that because the medical year was completed for the 2011 billing period, they could
3
provide him only enough funding to cover a small portion of the balance owing. (Tr. 33,
48-49) 
In July 2013, Applicant arranged a debt repayment plan with the collection agent
for creditor 1.a. (AE B) He made three payments between July and September 2013:
$713 in July 2013, $500 in August 2013, and $212 in September 2013. (AE B) After
making these three payments, he ceased making payments until October 2014, citing
additional financial burdens. (AE B)  
Since resuming his plan payments in October 2014, Applicant has made three
additional payments totaling $500. (AE B); Tr. 36-39) Under the terms of his
reinstatement plan, the collection agent for the medical provider takes $100 a month out
of his pay account. (Tr. 36, 50-51) Altogether, Applicant has made six payments
approximating $1,900.
Applicant nets $2,500 every two weeks and is aided by his wife’s bi-weekly net
monthly income of $1,100. (Tr. 56-58) After allowances for monthly household expenses,
and day care, he has no remainder. (Tr. 60) He expects to continue with his current
repayment arrangement until his creditor 1.a debt is satisfied.
Endorsements
Applicant’s direct supervisor who testified expressed familiarity with the
circumstances surrounding applicant’s auto accident and the medical bill that rose out of
the medical services provided applicant for his accident-related injuries. (Tr. 66-67) He
characterized Applicant as reliable and trustworthy. (Tr. 68)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
The AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
4
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
5
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debt of
$17,713 associated with medical services received in connection with a 2011 auto
accident. Medical expenses incurred that were not paid by his medical insurer as
expected were considerable and were not addressed by Applicant affirmatively until he
learned of the outstanding debt from the OPM agent who interviewed him in 2013.
Applicant’s actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guideline: DC ¶ 19a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.  See AG ¶ 18.
Applicant’s failure to timely discharge the medical debt covered by subparagraph
1.a resulted from his lack of timely notice from the original creditor, who likely mailed its
bill to Applicant’s old address. Once he learned of the outstanding debt from the OPM
agent who interviewed him in 2013, he contacted the collection agent for the creditor
and entered into a repayment plan. 
Since entering into a repayment arrangement with creditor 1.a in 2013, Applicant
has since made steady progress (with only one break in payments) in repaying the debt
with the financial resources available to him and has paid down almost $2,000 of the
original debt. Applicant’s accrual of a significant medical debt is aberrational and has
since been corrected with his payment arrangements that include some minor financial
assistance from his insurance carrier. His injuries that required medical treatment
6
resulted from his coming to the aid of his young son at risk of being struck by an
oncoming vehicle. The circumstances that contributed to the medical debt at issue
merits the application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Applicant’s repayment record with the collection agent for Applicant’s medical
creditor is encouraging and warrants the application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”
Applicant is considered to be reliable and trustworthy by his supervisor and can be
expected to continue his monthly payments until the debt is discharged. 
Applicant’s documented debt payments reflect satisfactory progress in
accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an
applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2009). His repayment actions to date enable him to meet the Appeal’s Board
requirements for stabilizing his finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21
2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR
Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App.
Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant documents a meritorious record of
civilian employment with his defense contractor employer and has impressive support
from his supervisor.  Addressing his finances, he has developed a promising solid track
record of debt management with the only identified delinquent debt and is committed to
maintaining his finances at respectable levels consistent with holding a security
clearance. 
Applicant’s documented payment initiatives concerning the medical debt covered
by subparagraph 1.a are encouraging and reflect a serious commitment on his part to
satisfy the only delinquent debt attributed to him based on the data pulled from his credit
reports. Overall, Applicant’s corrective actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances. Favorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to the allegation covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a:                         For Applicant
7
      C  o   n  c  l u  s  i o  n s         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
