                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )      ISCR  Case No.  14-03373          
                                                            )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
2
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 15, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on
January 7, 2015.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of 10 exhibits (GEs 1-10).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and five exhibits (AEs A-E). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on January 16, 2015. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented release of a state
lien. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record.
The Government was afforded seven days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a one-page
email, a money order made out to the favor of one the creditors (creditor 1.e) holding a
state tax lien, an employee award, documented satisfaction of his creditor 1.f debt, and
an IRS transcript covering his IRS tax payments for the 2009 tax year. Applicant’s post-
hearing submissions were admitted as AEs F-J.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file his federal tax returns for
tax years 2006 through 2008 and owes at least $9,000 in federal taxes for these years;
(b) failed to file State taxes for State A for at least tax year 2006, as required; (c) is
indebted to a law firm on a judgment entered in 2012 in the amount of $13,696; (d)
accumulated four consumer debts exceeding $1,600; and (e) accrued a delinquent home
equity loan in the approximate amount of $55,000.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations. He denied
the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.b, 1.h-1.i, and 1.j. He claimed that (a) the
debts covered by subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i are duplications and (b) that the 1.h debt is a
debt that belongs to his ex-wife.  
Applicant claimed the foreclosure of the first mortgage on his home and ensuing
creditor 1.j sale was caused by his divorce and should have produced enough sale
revenue to pay off the foreclosing lender’s second mortgage on the property as well. And
he claimed the foreclosed mortgage no longer appears on his credit report and is
uncollectible. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old web team lead for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
3
Background
Applicant married in 1997 and has two children from this marriage. (GE 1) he
separated from his wife in 2006 and divorced her in July 2007. (GE 1; Tr. 31-32) He has
been employed by his current employer for the past two years and has been gainfully
employed since 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 29-30) Applicant attended a local college between 2003
and 2004, but earned no degree. (GE 1; Tr. 36) He claims no military service.
Applicant’s finances
Applicant and his wife filed joint federal and state tax returns for 2005 and 2006,
but failed to file them timely for tax years 2006 through 2008. (AE J; Tr. 37-38) He
attributed his filing lapses to oversight and his past reliance on his ex-wife to file the
required federal and state tax returns on his behalf. (GE 6) Applicant expressed
uncertainty over when he filed his federal tax returns for the 2006-2008 tax years, but
believes he filed his 2006-2007 federal tax returns in 2008 and his 2009 return in 2009.
(Tr. 37-38) The historical accounting furnished by the IRS does not provide any
corroborating filing dates. Applicant’s expressed beliefs about the dates of his federal tax
return filings are credible and are accepted.
Beginning in 2010, Applicant completed a payment plan with the IRS to pay off the
estimated $14,000 in owed federal taxes for the 2006-2008 tax years. (AEs A and J)
Under his agreed payment terms, Applicant made monthly payments of $100. (Tr. 41-42)
Since 2010, he has made regular monthly $100 payments. (AEs A and J; Tr. 43-44) In
October 2014, he made his final payment of $2,578 to the IRS (creditor 1.a) that
completed his repayment agreement with the Service. (AEs A and J; Tr. 43-45) 
Tax records from State A document that Applicant failed to file a state tax return for
the tax year of 2006 and became indebted to the State’s taxing authority in the amount of
$6,266 for tax years 2006 and 2007. (GE 8 and AE B; Tr. 44-46) The State obtained a
judgment in September 2009 for the stated amount of $4,588, and this judgment remains
outstanding. (GEs 8 and 10 and AE G) While it is not clear from the furnished
documentation when Applicant filed his 2006 State A tax return, he is credited with filing
the return out of time and likely in 2008 when he filed his 2006 federal return. 
In January 2015, Applicant addressed the State A judgment with a $623 payment.
(AE G; Tr. 46-51) His furnished documentation does not indicate whether this payment
represents a down payment under a payment plan arranged with State A, or is an
isolated payment that will require further negotiations between the parties.
State B’s public records reveal that State B filed a tax lien in August 2011 to cover
a delinquent tax debt in the amount of $1,084. (GE 10) State B’s tax records reported that
only $274 was still owing to State B as of November 2013. (AE C; Tr. 55-56) Applicant
claimed that the lien has since been charged off by the State’s taxing authority, but
provided no documentary proof. To date, Applicant has not made any payment
4
arrangements with State B’s taxing authority to discharge this debt, or any portions
thereof (Tr. 62-63), and the debt remains unsettled and unpaid.
Besides accruing delinquent tax debts, Applicant accumulated several consumer
debts. As a part of his 2007 divorce decree, Applicant was assigned responsibility for his
accrued legal fees for his law firm’s handling of his divorce. (GEs 1-2 and 10; Tr. 52-53)
These fees totaled over $13,000. After making several monthly payments in 2008,
Applicant ceased making payments and has never resumed his payments to the law firm.
(Tr. 55-56)  When Applicant did not pay or settle the accrued legal fees claimed by
creditor 1.c, his creditor attorneys filed suit and obtained a judgment in March 2012 for
the amount of $13,696. (GE 7) Applicant has not made any progress in addressing this
judgment, and the judgment remains outstanding. (GEs 1-2 and AEs E-F; Tr. 52-53)
Applicant is credited with satisfying his wife’s accrued legal fees in accordance with the
terms of his divorce judgment. (AE E) 
Other accrued consumer debts are comprised of the following: creditor 1.f ($198),
creditor 1.g ($229), creditor 1.h ($461), and creditor 1.i ($882). Applicant has since paid
three of these debts. His proofs reflect payment of his creditor 1.f debt in January 2015.
(AE I; Tr. 60-61) He also documented payments of his creditor 1.h and 1.i debts with a
total payment of $1,343. (AEs D and I; Tr. 64-65) 
Addressing his creditor 1.j home equity loan delinquency, Applicant provided some
initial historical context for the loan. In 2004, he and his wife purchased their home and
financed it with a first mortgage of $340,000. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 70-71) In April 2005, he and
his wife completed a home equity line of credit in the amount of $110,000. (GEs 1-2 and
4-5; Tr.  67-68) The line of credit was secured by a second mortgage. 
Following his spousal separation in 2006, Applicant was initially ordered to pay
child support of $1,500 a month. (Tr. 33-34) This payment schedule was maintained until
July 2007, when the court increased his child support payments to $1,800 a month. (Tr.
33-34) Following their divorce, the court added monthly alimony obligations of $1,400 a
month to Applicant’s family responsibilities. (Tr. 34)  
Faced with these additional family burdens, Applicant could no longer meet his
mortgage obligations and became increasingly late in his mortgage payments on both his
first and second mortgages. (Tr. 64-66). Efforts to market the home failed when he and
his wife could not agree on a sale price. (Tr. 66-67) Records reveal that the first mortgage
was foreclosed in November 2006. (Tr. 69-70) Sale proceeds were insufficient to cover
the $55,000 loan balance owing on the second mortgage securing Applicant’s home
equity loan.  Once the foreclosure sale was finalized and the deficiency fixed, Applicant
made no effort to pay off the home equity loan deficiency and never received any
collection notice until 2013. (Tr. 68-69) The creditor initiated its suit in 2013 to collect the
deficiency. Whether the suit was ever dismissed on statute of limitations grounds is
unclear. (Tr. 68) Applicant remains uncertain of the status of the creditor’s suit and has
received no 1099C form from the creditor. (Tr. 68) 
5
Applicant has grossed about $128,000 a year from his employment for the past
two years and nets about $4,600 a month after taxes and child support deductions. (Tr.
29, 76-77) After allowances for monthly expenses (i.e., rent, car payment, auto insurance,
life insurance, utilities, and miscellaneous), Applicant has an estimated net monthly
remainder of about $2,000 a month. (Tr. 84) He estimates to have approximately $83,000
in his 401(k) retirement plans from current and previous employers and $500 in his
checking account. (Tr.  81-83) 
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
6
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of tax filing lapses (both
federal and state) and debt delinquencies. His listed debts include federal and state tax
delinquencies, an adverse judgment associated with a divorce, consumer-related debt
7
delinquencies (four in all), and home equity loan default. Applicant’s actions invite the
application of the financial considerations guideline.
Applicant’s accrued debts are attributable to lapses in judgment in the
management of his financial affairs. His debt delinquencies warrant the application of
three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” and DC ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s lapses in judgment in administering his finances were accompanied
by extenuating circumstances. He experienced a difficult separation and divorce in
2006-2007 that entailed considerable cost burdens that effected his finances. Divorce-
related cost impositions included child support and alimony payments. Attorneys fees,
both his own fees and his ex-wife’s fees, were also imposed on him. These cost
impositions were significant and entitle him to partial benefit of MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”
To date, Applicant has made visible progress in addressing his tax filing lapses
and debt delinquencies. To his credit, he filed his back federal and State A tax returns
for 2006 and 2007. He has paid off his federal tax debts, as well as debts owed to
creditors 1.f through 1.i.  However, he has not addressed his creditor 1.c judgment debt
or his State C tax debt. Nor has he addressed the large home equity debt owed to
creditor 1.j following the creditor’s foreclosure of its first mortgage debt delinquency in
2006.  His tax debts with States A and B, as well as his judgment debt with creditor 1.c,
remain works in progress that will require Applicant’s close personal attention in the
foreseeable future. So, while there are plenty of extenuating circumstances to credit
Applicant with, too many of his debts remain outstanding to enable him to take full
advantage of the “acted responsibly” prong of MC ¶ 20(b). Under these circumstances,
Applicant’s modest repayment efforts to date entitle him to no more than partial
application of MC ¶ 20(d). 
To be sure, Applicant seriously disputes his creditor 1.j home equity loan debt on
statute of limitations grounds. Regardless of whether this debt is an otherwise valid
debt, it may no longer be enforceable under the State’s applicable statute of limitations
8
for written contracts. Account activity covering Applicant’s creditor 1.j debt was last
addressed by Applicant in 2006, over six years ago.
The state statute of limitations in Applicant’s state of residency for claims based
on a mortgage-backed promissory note is four years. See 42 Pa.. C.S. 5525(a).
Applicant’s listed second mortgage deficiency with creditor 1.j appears to be covered by
the State’s statute of limitations, and is treated, as such, as a debt that is limitations
barred.  
While potentially applicable statutes of limitation have not been recognized by our
Appeal Board to mitigate security risks associated with unresolved delinquent debts,
statutes of limitation in general are considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation. Still, they have
never been equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,  ISCR
Case No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020, at 5-6
(App. Bd. June 2001). 
Weight, if any, to be assigned to potentially applicable statutes of limitations
under the financial consideration guideline should be considered in light of all the
circumstances surrounding the applicant’s historical track record and must take account
of his entire history of demonstrated trust and responsibility. In Applicant’s case, his
financial history cannot completely discount the financial difficulties he has experienced
since his divorce in 2007. Although the financial circumstances associated with his
divorce are considerably extenuated, they do reflect a part of Applicant’s financial track
record and are entitled to some weight to be taken into account in assessing the amount
of mitigation weight to be accorded the application of the state’s statute of limitations to
Applicant’s circumstances. Viewed in this overall-track record perspective, the
controlling state statute of limitations for secured loan transactions cannot be accorded
significant mitigation weight in evaluating Applicant’s overall financial risk with respect to
the specifically covered creditor 1.j debt.  
 
Based on Applicant’s afforded reliance on his State’s four-year statute of
limitations to avert enforcement risk with respect to his limitation-barred creditor 1.j debt,
full mitigation credit is not available to Applicant. By virtue of the age and non-
enforcement status of the debts, MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” has only limited
applicability to the limitation-barred creditor 1.j debt.  
Applicant’s limited repayment efforts, and failure to attempt any negotiated
reduction of creditor 1.j’s loan default claim do not reflect satisfactory progress in
accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an
applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2009). Applicant’s modest repayment actions are not enough to enable him to meet the
Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing his finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482
9
(App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12,
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant documents some repayment
progress, but not enough to facilitate safe predictions about his ability to manage his
finances in the future. He has not completed repayment plans with his remaining two tax
debt creditors (i.e., creditors 1.d and 1.e) or judgment creditor (creditor 1.c), and has
failed to demonstrate sufficient payment track record that meets minimum Appeal Board
criteria. He provided no evidence of civic or community contributions and only limited
evidence of repayment with his payoffs of his four smaller creditors (i.e., creditors 1.f-1i)
Overall, Applicant’s corrective actions to date are insufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.c-1.e and 1.j:                            Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.a-1.b and 1.f-1.i:                  For Applicant
                 C  o  n   clusions         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
11
