 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00968 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his possession and use 
of a current foreign passport. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the foreign preference guideline (Guideline C).1 On May 13, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR, affirmatively waived his right to a hearing, and requested 
a decision regarding his suitability for a clearance on the written record.  
 
 On August 6, 2014, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM contains the Government’s proposed findings of 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
fact, argument, and seven exhibits. On February 5, 2015, Applicant filed a response to 
the FORM (Response). On March 10, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Applicant states that Government Exhibit (Gx.) 4 is false. Specifically, he claims 
that a summary of an interview conducted by a Defense Security Service (DSS) agent 
of his facility security officer (FSO) is false. In light of Applicant’s pro se status, I will 
consider this an objection to the admission of Gx. 4.  
 
 The challenged two-page report is not a personnel background report of 
investigation, which would be inadmissible in this forum upon objection. See Directive, ¶ 
E.3.1.20. Instead, Gx. 4 is a DSS agent’s security assessment of a secured facility, 
which the agent was required to file irrespective of its potential future use in a DOHA or 
other administrative proceeding. Gx. 4 is similar to a business record, which are 
generally admissible in DOHA proceedings.2 Moreover, the relevant information 
contained in Gx. 4 is consistent with other record evidence, to include a statement from 
the FSO and a spreadsheet that Applicant submitted with his Response. Accordingly, 
after considering all potential legal and evidentiary grounds, I overrule Applicant’s 
objection.3 Applicant did not object to the admission of any of the other exhibits offered 
by the Government and, therefore, Gx. 1 – 7 are admitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 53, is the president and chief executive officer of a U.S. company that 
he started. His company performs work for DOD. Applicant was born in Australia and 
immigrated to the United States in 1978. He became a U.S. citizen in 2004, but retains 
his Australian citizenship and possesses a current Australian passport.  
 
 Applicant was first granted a security clearance in 2009 and, in return for being 
granted access to classified information, purportedly surrendered his Australian 
passport to his FSO. In 2010 and 2013, Applicant retrieved his Australian passport and 
used it to travel to Australia. Applicant will not travel to Australia on his U.S. passport 
because if he does he would immediately lose his Australian passport. (Answer)4 
Applicant plans to use his Australian passport on future trips to Australia. (Response)5 
                                                          
2 Fed. R. Evid. 803; Directive, ¶ E.3.1.19 (federal rules of evidence serve as a guide and technical rules of 
evidence may be relaxed to allow for the development of a full and complete record). 
 
3 ISCR Case No. 11-12461 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2013) (evidence compiled or created in the regular 
course of business, to include Defense Investigative Service facility inspection reports, are properly 
admissible in DOHA proceedings). See also, Palmieri v. United States, et. al., No. 12-1403, 2014 U.S. 
Dist. LEXIS 155613, at *24-*33 (D.C. Dist. Ct. Nov. 3, 2014) (admission of a letter from a DOD criminal 
investigative agency did not violate either the Directive or appellant’s due process rights).  
 
4 “I have chosen to retain my Australian Passport (although surrendered to the Facility Security Officer) so 
that when I retire it is possible to spend more time in Australia. I do not plan to retire soon. When I travel 
to Australia I am required by the Australian Government to use my Australian Passport. If I travel to 
Australia on my U.S Passport I will lose my Australian Passport immediately.” (Answer) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s use of his Australian passport to travel to Australia came to the 
attention of DSS in 2012, following a routine security assessment. During the 
assessment, the FSO informed a DSS agent that Applicant’s foreign passport was 
secured in a locked safe in a file room, and access to the safe was limited to Applicant’s 
administrative assistants and another company official. The FSO further stated that he 
had not notified the Government regarding Applicant’s use of his Australian passport to 
travel to Australia. (Gx. 4) Subsequently, the FSO notified the Government about 
Applicant’s travels to Australia using his Australian passport. (Response, Spreadsheet) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant also bears the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises . . . there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
5 “I do possess an Australian Passport but only intend to use it when traveling to Australia (less than once 
per year).” (Response) 
 
4 
 
 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7.6 Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Applicant’s possession and use of his foreign passport raises this 
concern and also establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any 
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship,” to include “possession of a current 
foreign passport.”  
 
 The foreign influence concern sets forth a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 11(c): exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; 
 
AG ¶ 11(d): use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant 
security authority; and  
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Generally, the surrender by a clearance holder of their foreign passport to their 
FSO mitigates security concerns that an individual with access to classified information 
possess a foreign passport. However, the evidence established that Applicant’s act in 
handing over his Australian passport to his FSO (or other employee) to place in a 
company safe was not a true relinquishment or surrender of his foreign passport. 
Rather, Applicant maintains unfettered access to his Australian passport. In the past few 
years, Applicant has freely retrieved his Australian passport from his company’s safe 
and used it for travel to Australia. He plans to do so again on future travel to Australia. 
Applicant’s action in temporarily handing over his foreign passport to his FSO is 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns at issue. His actions neither complied with 
                                                          
6 See also, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 4 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014) (“an adverse decision under the 
Directive is not a determination that the applicant is disloyal.”). 
 
5 
 
 
the letter nor the spirit of the mitigating condition listed at AG ¶ 11(e). He did not present 
any evidence that would allow for the favorable application of any of the other relevant 
foreign influence mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I hereby incorporate my above comments and highlight 
some additional whole-person factors. Applicant is a successful businessman, 
dedicated husband and father, and a community leader. The current mission of his 
company is to “teach the community to build secure software.” He hopes to bring his 
company’s considerable skill in this vital area to assist the DOD in securing its 
information technology systems. (Response) However, this and other favorable 
evidence do not mitigate the obvious security concerns that exist when an individual 
granted access to this nation’s secrets possesses and actively uses a foreign passport, 
even a foreign passport issued by one this nation’s closest allies. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
