 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01576  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations 
and criminal conduct concerns alleged in the SOR. His $5,400 in delinquent debt 
remains unresolved and he failed to submit any information to mitigate his 2009 and 
2010 arrests. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and criminal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on November 4, 2014. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on November 14, 2014. He did not respond. The case was 
assigned to me on February 3, 2015. I admitted the items attached to the FORM as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1-6 without objection.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government offered Applicant’s February 2014 subject interview for 
admission into evidence. Applicant did not authenticate the document. As such, the 
document is not admitted.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 50, has worked as an electronic mechanic for a federal contractor 
since at least October 2003. On his February 2013 security clearance application, 
Applicant disclosed derogatory information about his finances and criminal history.4 
 
 The background investigation confirmed that Applicant is indebted to seven 
creditors for approximately $5,400. These debts are alleged in the SOR.5 Applicant 
claims that he began having financial problems when his wife became unable to work 
because of a health issue. As a result, Applicant claims that his household income 
decreased by approximately 33%. Although Applicant did not specify when his wife 
stopped working, the accounts alleged in the SOR became delinquent between 2007 
and 2013. However, GE 6, a January 2014 credit report shows that between 2004 and 
at least December 2013, Applicant received approximately 48 short-term loans. The 
accounts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d-1.f, appear to be for short-term loans. Applicant denies 
that he owes the debt alleged in ¶ 1.a because it has been charged off by the creditor. 
He admits owing the accounts alleged in ¶¶ 1.b – 1.g. At present, all seven accounts 
remain unresolved. Applicant did not provide any current information about his 
finances.6 
  
 The investigation also confirmed the two arrests Applicant disclosed on his 
security clearance application. He was arrested in July 2009 and charged with theft. The 
charge was dismissed in December 2009. Applicant was arrested again in April 2010 
and charged with fraudulent possession of a prescription and forgery of a financial 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 See Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
5 Based on GE 6, I find that SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are duplicates. Both accounts report similar creditor 
names. The accounts also have matching account numbers and account balances. Accordingly, I find in 
Applicant’s favor on SOR ¶ 1.h. 
 
6 GE 3-4, 6.  
 
3 
 
instrument,7 both felonies. He received deferred adjudication and was sentenced to five 
years of probation. The court released Applicant from probation in November 2013 and 
dismissed the charges. Applicant did not provide any information about the 
circumstances of either arrest. On his security clearance application, Applicant 
disclosed that he abused prescription medication between July 2008 and January 2009 
to medicate a back problem that resulted in two surgeries.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
                                                          
7 Applicant argues that he was not charged with forgery of a financial instrument. However, he did not 
provide any evidence to support his claims.  
 
8 GE 6. 
 
 
4 
 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9 The Government does not have to prove that an applicant poses a clear 
and present danger to national security,10 or that an applicant poses an imminent threat 
of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show that an applicant has a 
history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him more vulnerable to 
financial pressures.11 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $5,400 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.12 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.13 Although the total amount of delinquent debt owed is relatively small, 
Applicant’s heavy reliance on short-term loans is a further indication that he is unable to 
live within his means and that his finances remain a concern. Applicant has not 
presented any information to mitigate these concerns. The record does not contain 
enough information to support a finding that the events causing Applicant’s financial 
problems were beyond his control or that he acted responsibility to resolve them. There 
is no indication Applicant is making any effort to resolve his delinquent accounts or that 
his finances are otherwise under control. Accordingly, none of the financial mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations, as well as a doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness.14 Although the charge was dismissed, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with theft in 2009. Shortly thereafter, he received deferred adjudication on two 
felony charges related to the fraudulent possession of a prescription and forgery of a 
financial instrument.15 While the offenses occurred a number of years ago, this does not 
mitigate the concerns raised by Applicant’s criminal conduct, both of which speak 
directly to Appellant’s trustworthiness. The record does not contain any evidence that 
the Applicant did not commit either offense. Nor did he provide any evidence to support 
a finding that the factors that motivated the commission of these acts are no longer 
present in his life or that the underlying circumstances are unlikely to recur. Applicant 
has not provided any evidence to show rehabilitation or reform. 
 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989). 
  
12 GE 5-8. 
 
13 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
14 AG ¶ 30. 
 
15 AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).  
 
5 
 
Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. In 
requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In doing so, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, mitigate the financial concerns, or establish evidence of financial 
rehabilitation. The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. Following Egan16 and 
the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a- 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
