 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
XXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ADP Case No. 14-02581 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 20, 2014, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP). On July 30, 2014, the Department of Defense issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 20, 2014. Applicant admitted 
the allegations in the SOR. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On December 3, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on December 14, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
December 15, 2014. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day 
time allowed that would have expired on January 14, 2015. I received the case 
assignment on March 12, 2015. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f. (Items 1-6)  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He was married and is now divorced. He has no 
children. He was born in Vietnam and came to the United States in 1974. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1995. He works for a defense contractor. He obtained a 
masters’ in business administration in 2009. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant could afford foreign travel in 2009, 2011, and 2013 for personal 
vacations. He traveled to countries in Europe in 2009 and 2011. In 2011 he also 
traveled to the Middle East. In 2013 he traveled in Asia. During that time he fell into 
arrearages on his $2,300 monthly mortgage payment. He also incurred three small 
debts totaling $479. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant owed a collector $248 and has not resolved this debt with any payment 
(Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant’s Answer claims he was unaware of it until the 
government investigator brought it to his attention. This debt is for water service from 
his municipality and dates from 2011.  (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant also owes the same collection agent $115 on another account 
(Subparagraph 1.b) dating from 2013. This debt also is for water service. This debt is 
not resolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant owes $116 on a debt owed to a gas company from 2013 
(Subparagraph 1.c). This debt is not resolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant defaulted on a mortgage on his residence in 2010 (Subparagraph 1.d). 
Foreclosure proceedings started in 2012. The past due balance on the mortgage was 
about $30,000 on an initial mortgage amount of $470,000. This debt has not been 
resolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy on September 9, 2010 (Subparagraph 
1.f). It was dismissed by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court on October 19, 2010. The only debt 
listed was Applicant’s mortgage. (Items 1-9) 
 
 Applicant then filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy again on January 28, 2011 
(Subparagraph 1.e). This action was converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on March 8, 
2011. It was dismissed by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court on July 13, 2011. The mortgage 
delinquency remains unresolved. (Items 1-9) 
 
 Applicant completed the required credit counseling under the U.S. Bankruptcy 
Code on September 8, 2010. He does not have any further financial counseling. (Items 
7-9) 
 
 Applicant claimed to be unemployed from September 2008 to October 2009 
while attending school for his masters’ degree. He was also unemployed from October 
2011 to February 2012 while searching for a new job. (Item 6)    
 
          Applicant did not submit any documentation showing that he has participated in 
additional credit counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning 
the quality of his job performance. He submitted no character references or other 
evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable 
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
trustworthiness concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to 
the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2011 to the present, Applicant accumulated four delinquent debts, totaling 
$30,479, that remain unpaid or unresolved. Applicant has not resolved three small utility 
debts for his house and the mortgage delinquency on the same home. AG ¶ 19 (a) and 
(c) apply.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition has 
any applicability. 
 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s failure to repay his debts is current and ongoing. AG ¶ 20 (a) has not 
been established. 
 
Applicant’s failure to repay his debts was not beyond his control. He did not act 
responsibly in trying to resolve his debts, particularly his mortgage obligation. He did not 
show by any evidence that his periods of unemployment adversely affected his ability to 
repay his debts. AG ¶ 20 (b) has not been established. 
 
Applicant received counseling as part of his bankruptcy filing requirement. No 
other financial counseling was obtained by him. His financial problems are not under 
control. Applicant did not submit any documents to counter the allegations in the SOR. 
AG ¶ 20 (c) has not been established. 
 
Applicant has not submitted any proof of any payment or other resolution of his 
financial delinquencies. AG ¶ 20 (d) has not been established in the absence of any 
good-faith efforts to resolve his debts.  
 
 There is no evidence of a legitimate basis held by Applicant to dispute these four 
debts. AG ¶ 20 (e) has not been established. 
 
Finally, affluence is not an issue in Applicant’s case. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (f) has 
not been established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant=s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past four years. 
 
At the same time his debts remained unresolved, Applicant took three 
international vacations. The money spent on those trips would have resolved some or 
all of the four debts listed in the SOR. His financial irresponsibility shows he is not 
interested in resolving his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the whole person-concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
