 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-00200 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 13, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether her clearance should be granted, continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2014 and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated January 30, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated February 
5, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on February 24, 2014. She was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the allotted period of 
30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. On March 11, 2015, Department Counsel 
indicated that he had no objection to Applicant’s additional information. On March 16, 
2015, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old security services supervisor, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since September 2011. She seeks a security clearance in 
conjunction with her current employment. (Item 5.)  
 
Applicant earned her GED in August 1994. She was married from July 1996 to 
November 1997, and that marriage ended by divorce. Applicant remarried in December 
1998. She has two adult daughters and one adult stepson. (Items 5, 8.) Applicant did 
not serve in the armed forces. (Item 5.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains 13 allegations under this concern alleging a county tax 
lien, a judgment, unpaid taxes, and other delinquent debt totaling approximately 
$18,964. Applicant provided little information regarding the status of these debts and 
Department Counsel prepared a FORM reflecting an SOR response with little or no 
mitigating evidence.  
 
However, Applicant’s FORM response provided additional mitigating evidence 
supported by documentation regarding her debt status. The following summarizes the 
status of Applicant’s 13 SOR debts:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – County tax lien for $1,138 filed in September 2012. County filed 
release of tax lien in January 2015. DEBT RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
                                                          
1
The FORM contains limited facts regarding Applicant precluding the development of a more 
comprehensive Background Information section. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.b – Judgment in favor of credit card company filed in September 2008 
for $968. Satisfaction of judgment filed in July 2013. DEBT RESOLVED. (FORM 
response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Past-due debt to a “medical creditor” for $1,053. Applicant contacted 
the three major credit bureaus and they were unable to provide her with any information 
about this account. Debt appears on Applicant’s September 2013 credit report with no 
identifying creditor information, but does not appear on her January 2015 credit report. 
Upon further review, it appears the account was sold to creditor in SOR ¶ 1.h, 
discussed below. DEBT DISPUTED. (Items 6 and 7; FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Collection account for $270. In August 2014, Applicant retained the 
services of a credit management company and enrolled this debt in a debt consolidation 
plan. Since enrollment, Applicant pays $279 monthly by direct debit to the credit 
management company and will continue to do so until enrolled debts are settled or paid 
off. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Collection account for $8,441. In August 2014, Applicant retained 
the services of a credit management company and enrolled this debt in a debt 
consolidation plan. Since enrollment, Applicant pays $279 monthly by direct debit to the 
credit management company and will continue to do so until enrolled debts are settled 
or paid off. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Collection account for $107. Applicant contacted the three major 
credit bureaus and they were unable to provide her with any information about this 
account. Debt appears on Applicant’s September 2013 credit report, but does not 
appear on her January 2015 credit report. Upon further review, it appears the account 
was sold to creditor in SOR ¶ 1.h, discussed below. DEBT DISPUTED. (Items 6 and 7; 
FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – Collection account for $1,246.  In August 2014, Applicant retained 
the services of a credit management company and this debt was enrolled in a debt 
consolidation plan. Since enrollment, Applicant pays $279 monthly by direct debit to the 
credit management company and will continue to do so until enrolled debts are settled 
or paid off. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Collection account for $1,404. In August 2014, Applicant retained 
the services of a credit management company and enrolled this debt in a debt 
consolidation plan. Since enrollment, Applicant pays $279 monthly by direct debit to the 
credit management company and will continue to do so until enrolled debts are settled 
or paid off. This account appears to include the debts in SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.f, discussed 
above. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – Collection account for $346. Applicant contacted the three major 
credit bureaus and they were unable to provide her with any information about this 
account. Debt does not appear on her credit reports. DEBT DISPUTED. (Items 6 and 7; 
FORM response) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.j – Collection account for $402. In August 2014, Applicant retained the 
services of a credit management company and enrolled this debt in a debt consolidation 
plan. Since enrollment, Applicant pays $279 monthly by direct debit to the credit 
management company and will continue to do so until enrolled debts are settled or paid 
off. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – Collection account for $1,545. In August 2014, Applicant retained 
the services of a credit management company and enrolled this debt in a debt 
consolidation plan. Since enrollment, Applicant pays $279 monthly by direct debit to the 
credit management company and will continue to do so until enrolled debts are settled 
or paid off. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – Collection account for $172. Paid in full in February 2015. DEBT 
RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m – Federal income taxes owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
for tax year 2010 for $1,872. Per her January 2015 agreement with the IRS, Applicant 
began making $150 monthly payments in March 2015 by direct debit. DEBT BEING 
RESOLVED. (FORM response)  
 
The FORM contains limited information regarding the circumstances that led to 
Applicant’s financial difficulties. During her October 2013 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), Applicant stated that she quit her 
job and was in a non-income earning status from November 2010 to August 2011. She 
did this to care for her granddaughter while her daughter left home to serve in the Navy. 
Applicant’s ten-month loss of income impacted her ability to remain current on her bills. 
(Items 5, 8) 
 
During her OPM PSI, Applicant stated that her current financial condition is “fair 
and stable.” Apart from the SOR debts, Applicant is current on her remaining monthly 
bills. She has also benefited from financial counseling provided by the credit 
management company handling her debt consolidation. (Items 6, 7, 8)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Her debt 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and her 
behavior does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant experienced a ten-month period 
of period of unemployment while she cared for her granddaughter during her daughter’s 
Navy service. When Applicant’s daughter finished her Navy service and was able to 
care for her daughter, Applicant returned to work. Applicant’s ten-month loss of income 
affected her earning potential and ability to remain current on her debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant retained the services of a credit 
management company and received credit counseling. AG ¶ 20(d) is fully applicable.2 
Applicant made a good-faith effort to address financial concerns alleged. She has paid 
three of her debts, has consolidated six of her debts with a credit management 
company, and has made payment arrangements with the IRS. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable. 
Applicant disputes the validity of three of her debts and contacted all three credit 
bureaus. At least two of those debts appear to have been sold to one of the creditors 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
her debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor weighs heavily in her favor. 
She is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. She is current on her 
day-to-day expenses, lives within her means, and her SOR debts have been resolved or 
are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that [s]he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that [s]he has “. . . established a plan to resolve [her] 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and [her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of [her] outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Six of Applicant’s debts are being paid through a debt consolidation company 
and her IRS debt is being satisfied through monthly payments. After Applicant regained 
a steady income stream, she was able to address her past-due debts. Applicant was 
faced with a difficult choice – quit her job in order to care for her granddaughter or let 
her daughter and granddaughter fend for themselves. Applicant made the choice of 
putting family first to help her daughter and granddaughter. Despite her financial 
setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that she is on the road to financial recovery. 
These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered the circumstances that led to her 
financial difficulties, her financial recovery, the steps she has taken to resolve her 
financial situation, her potential for future service as a defense contractor, and the 
mature and responsible manner in which she dealt with her situation. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude she has mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:  For Applicant 
    
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
   
