 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended. See also Directive, Section E3.1.1.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-02674
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant used marijuana sporadically between July 1998 and August 2013. He
did not present information sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about his drug
use. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 14, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) could not determine
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to
classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included four documents (Items 1 - 4) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
 Directive, 6.3.4
2
On July 18, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline H (Drug
Involvement).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without2
a hearing. On October 8, 2014, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material
(FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 5, 2014,3
and was notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. He did not submit
additional information, and the record closed on December 5, 2014. The case was
assigned to me on February 4, 2015.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana “multiple times” between
July 1998 and August 2013 (SOR 1.a). Applicant admitted this allegation and provided
additional remarks with his response. (FORM, Item 2) In addition to the facts
established by Applicant’s admission, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 40 years old and has applied for a security clearance required for
employment as a welder at a defense contractor. Applicant’s employment with that
contractor is contingent on his qualification for a security clearance. Applicant currently
works as a physical therapy assistant. Since being unemployed for about a year,
Applicant has been consistently employed in a variety of jobs beginning in December
2004. This is his first application for a clearance.
 Applicant used marijuana between 1998 and 2013. His use was sporadic –
about two or three times a year – and he did not use marijuana at all from sometime in
2002 until December 2012, when he smoked marijuana at holiday party. Applicant also
used marijuana once in January 2013 and once in August 2013. (FORM, Items 2 - 4)
Applicant and his wife have been married since October 2010. They have a
three-year-old child together. Applicant stated in his response to the SOR that his use of
illegal drugs is in the past and that he has matured to meet the responsibilities of
marriage and parenthood. (FORM, Items 2 - 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
3
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it6
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to8
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant is 40 years old and he has used marijuana, albeit infrequently, over the
past 16 years. This information raises a security concern articulated at AG ¶ 24, as
follows:
4
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying condition
at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)).
In response to the Government’s information, the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating
conditions are available:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.
Applicant started using marijuana as an adult in 1998. He did not use marijuana
at all for about 10 years before using again in December 2012 and January 2013. His
last known use was in August 2013. His abstinence since then might be considered
sufficient; however, his willingness to use marijuana over such a long period of time,
and to repeat that conduct after long periods of abstinence suggests more time is
needed to assess Applicant’s commitment to refrain from future drug use. Further,
Applicant’s assertion that he has matured in response to marriage and parenthood is
contradicted by the fact he used marijuana at least three times after he married and
after his child was born. 
All of the foregoing precludes application of either AG ¶ 26(a) or AG ¶ 26(b).
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns about his involvement with illegal
drugs.
5
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant presents as a hard worker, and he at least recognizes the
impact illegal drug involvement might have on his family. Nonetheless, the positive
information in his background is not sufficient to overcome the Government’s concerns
about his drug use. The record as a whole reasonably shows that doubts remain about
Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the
national interest is the principal goal of these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
