1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-02496 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). Foreign preference concerns are mitigated, but 
foreign influence concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for assignment to a public trust 
position is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 25, 2013, seeking eligibility for a public trust position. On July 18, 2014, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines C and B. DOD acted under DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 30, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 5, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on December 22, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a notice of hearing on 
2 
 
January 5, 2015, scheduling the hearing for January 28, 2015. Due to inclement 
weather, the hearing was postponed until January 30, 2015. I convened the hearing as 
rescheduled. Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement of Directive ¶ E3.1.8. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts about 
Israel. The request and supporting documentation are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HX) I. I took administrative notice of the facts set out below.  
 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until March 3, 2015, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX D through 
J, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding 
AX D through J are attached to the record as HX II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on February 18, 2015. The record closed on March 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old consultant employed by a defense contractor since 
July 2013. He previously held public trust positions from May 2009 to June 2010 and 
October 2010 to May 2011, as a consultant for other government agencies.  
 
 Applicant was born in Israel and came to the United States in June 1987. He 
served in the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) from 1978 to 1982, as an electronics 
technician in a tank factory. He was required to serve for four years instead of three 
because his military service was deferred for one year while he received electronics 
training. (GX 3 at 6.) He attended a U.S. university from June 1987 to June 1989 and 
received a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and computer science. He 
became a U.S. citizen in June 1994 and obtained a U.S. passport in October 2005. He 
held an Israeli passport before becoming a U.S. citizen, and he renewed it in August 
2006.  
 
 Applicant married a native-born U.S. citizen in August 1988, and they divorced in 
December 1989. He married his current spouse, also a native-born U.S. citizen, in June 
1993. They have a 20-year-old daughter, an 18-year-old son, and a 13-year-old son, 
who are all native-born U.S. citizens. Their daughter went to Israel at age 18, became 
an Israeli citizen, and joined the IDF in January 2014 for a term of two years. She 
serves in the education branch of the IDF, teaching Israeli soldiers about Israeli history 
and Zionism. (Tr. 49.) Applicant has daily contact with his daughter. (GX 3 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother was born in Germany and is a citizen and resident of Israel. 
His father was born in Poland, was a citizen and resident of Israel, and worked as a 
diamond cutter. He is deceased. (Tr. 51; GX 1 at 33.) Applicant’s older brother, age 61, 
is a citizen and resident of Israel and works in an administrative position for a university 
in Israel. His brother served for 20 years in the IDF and retired as a major. (Tr. 60-61.) 
Applicant has weekly contact with his mother and monthly contact with his brother. (GX 
3 at 3.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant and his mother are joint owners of a bank account in Israel, worth 
about $40,000. He regards this bank account as his mother’s property. He has joint 
ownership of the bank account to facilitate his access to it in the event of an emergency 
involving his mother. (GX 3 at 3.) Applicant has no other property or assets in Israel. 
 
 Applicant traveled to Israel to visit family in August 2003, August 2005, August 
2008, August 2009, September 2009, August 2010, and November 2013. Each trip was 
for two weeks or less. (GX 1 at 41-49; Tr. 58-59.) For each trip, he used his Israeli 
passport to enter and exit Israel, because it made entry and exit easier. (GX 3 at 1.) 
Applicant and his family visited Israel again in December 2014, for their son’s Bar 
Mitzvah. On this trip, Applicant entered Israel with his U.S. passport and exited with his 
Israeli passport. (Tr. 52-53.) He has never used his Israeli passport to enter any country 
other than Israel. (Tr. 58.) Upon being advised of the trustworthiness concerns raised by 
his possession of an Israeli passport, Applicant surrendered his Israeli passport to his 
facility security officer (FSO) and obtained a letter from the Israeli Consul General’s 
office permitting him to enter and exit Israel without an Israeli passport. (AX D through 
J.) He also asked the Consul General’s office about the procedure for renouncing his 
Israeli citizenship, and he was advised that renunciation is a one-year process and is 
difficult to reverse. (AX C; AX G.) 
 
 The summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) in September 2009 indicates 
that Applicant was questioned about his loyalties to the United States and Israel, and he 
told the security investigator that he would never relinquish his Israeli citizenship and 
that he is an “Israeli first.” He also told the investigator that the issue is moot because 
he could regain his Israeli citizenship even if he renounced it. (GX 4 at 1.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not remember making the statement 
about being “Israeli first,” but that he must have said it if it was in the PSI summary. 
When asked if he still felt the same way, he testified, “I feel that I have an allegiance to 
both countries, and I would take away that statement, Israel first.” (Tr. 65.) 
 
 The summary of a second PSI in September 2013 reflects that Applicant said 
that he holds no allegiance to one country over another and that his allegiance to Israel 
is such that he would give his life to protect Israel. (GX 3 at 1.) He was not questioned 
about this statement at the hearing and did not elaborate on it.  
 
 Applicant’s rabbi, who has known him and his family since 1992, regards him as 
a devoted family person, who is hard working and committed to maintaining the highest 
standards of behavior in his personal and professional life. The rabbi has found 
Applicant trustworthy and dependable, and he believed Applicant can be trusted to 
never reveal sensitive information to unauthorized recipients. His observation of 
Applicant has led him to conclude that Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is 
unquestionable and his trustworthiness is exceptional. (AX A.) 
 
 An active-duty lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Air Force, who has known Applicant 
for most of his life, is aware of Applicant’s family connections in Israel, including his 
4 
 
daughter’s service in the IDF. He believes that Applicant is a person of high moral 
character who is unqualifiedly and deeply loyal to the United States. (AX B.)  
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy with a diversified, technologically advanced 
economy. Almost half of Israel’s exports are high technology, including electronic and 
biomedical equipment. Israel is a close ally of the United States, and the United States 
is its largest trading partner.  
 
Israel has been identified as a major practitioner of industrial espionage against 
U.S. companies. There have been instances of illegal export, or attempted illegal 
export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel. Israel has become a major 
global leader in arms exports, and the United States and Israel have periodically 
disagreed over Israeli sales of sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-party 
countries, including China and Russia. 
 
The U.S. and Israel have close cultural, historic, and political ties. They 
participate in joint military planning and training, and have collaborated on military 
research and weapons development. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a 
cornerstone of U.S. Middle East policy since Israel’s creation in 1948.  
 
Israel generally respects the rights of its citizens. When human-rights violations 
have occurred, they have involved Palestinian detainees or Arab-Israelis. Terrorist 
suicide bombings are a continuing threat in Israel, and U.S. citizens in Israel are 
advised to be cautious.  
 
 Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship or have a claim to 
dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other legal purposes. U.S. 
citizens visiting Israel have been subjected to prolonged questioning and thorough 
searches by Israeli authorities upon entry or departure.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
5 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant obtained and Israeli passport in August 2006 
after becoming a U.S. citizen in 1994 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and that he used his Israeli passport 
for international travel on “numerous occasions” (SOR ¶ 1.b). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 9: “When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States.”  
  
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse 
trustworthiness decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 17, 2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual 
national, but rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country 
through actions.”  ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
 The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is not limited to countries hostile 
to the United States. “Under the facts of a given case, an applicant’s preference, explicit 
or implied, even for a nation with which the U.S. has enjoyed long and peaceful 
relations, might pose a challenge to U.S. interests.” ADP Case No. 07-14939 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Mar. 11, 2009). 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 10, a disqualifying condition may arise from: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport . . . ; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s retention and renewal of his Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen establishes AG ¶ 10(a). His use of his foreign passport for travel to Israel does 
not trigger a separate disqualifying condition under this guideline, but it falls under the 
general category of exercising “any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship.” 
His statements during his PSIs in September 2009 and September 2013, expressing 
equal allegiance to the United States and Israel, establish the disqualifying condition in 
AG ¶ 10(d). His surrender of his Israeli passport to his FSO establishes the mitigating 
condition in AG ¶ 11(e): “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of Germany and Israel 
and resides in Israel (SOR ¶ 2.a); his daughter is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Israel and resides in Israel (SOR ¶ 2.b); and his brother is a citizen and resident of 
Israel (SOR ¶ 2.c). The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 
as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a [trustworthiness] concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Applicant’s connections to Israel raise three disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member or financial interests subject to a foreign government. The 
totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family 
tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 The Israeli citizenship of Applicant’s mother, daughter, and brother, all of whom 
reside in Israel, coupled with the Israeli military connections of Applicant’s daughter and 
brother, are sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and raise the 
potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). Applicant’s interest in a joint bank account with 
his mother is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
8 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. Three members of Applicant’s immediate family are 
citizens and residents of Israel, and two have military connections to Israel. These 
family ties, coupled with Israel’s record of industrial espionage, preclude a finding that it 
is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. In terms of allegiance, Applicant has one foot in the 
United States and one foot in Israel. His responses during the PSIs reflect that he does 
not favor one country over the other. While he has strong ties to the United States, he 
also has strong ties to Israel. I am not convinced that he would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of U.S. interests. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. Applicant has frequent contact with his daughter 
and mother, and less frequent contact with his brother. He has not overcome the 
rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a foreign 
country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
 AG ¶ 8(d) is established. While $40,000 is a substantial sum, Applicant regards 
this money as his mother’s, and he has joint ownership only to facilitate access to the 
money in the event his mother is unable to do so. Furthermore, there is no evidence 
that the Israeli government uses the financial assets of its citizens as leverage to gain 
industrial and proprietary information. 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. He has twice held public trust 
positions, apparently without incident. He has a reputation among friends and 
associates as a loyal American. His attachment to Israel falls short of a foreign 
preference, because he has made it clear that he has no preference for either country. 
However, his divided allegiances preclude a finding that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interests in favor of the United States. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines C and B, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns based on foreign preference, but he has not mitigated the concerns based on 
his vulnerability to foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant him 
eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
