 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03108 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 21, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
15, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 11, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. She submitted documents that were marked AE E and F and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 23, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 1995. She seeks to retain her security clearance, which she 
has held since at least 2003. She has a bachelor’s degree. She is married with two 
adult children and two adult stepchildren.1 
 
 The SOR alleges a federal tax debt of $1,100 (SOR ¶ 1.r); deficiencies owed on 
car loans after repossessions (SOR ¶ 1.e - $5,351; SOR ¶ 1.f - $9,278); 13 
miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling about $11,500; and a mortgage loan that was 
$30,000 past due (SOR ¶ 1.s). Each debt was listed on at least one credit report. The 
SOR also alleges that Applicant’s debts were discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
in 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and that Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2014 (SOR ¶ 
1.a). 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. She filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
three times, and her debts were discharged in 1997, 2005, and 2014. Applicant gave 
birth to her child without medical insurance, which created the financial problems 
leading to her 1997 bankruptcy. Applicant’s sister had a drug problem. In 2003, 
Applicant took in her sister’s children, which led to the 2005 bankruptcy. The children 
stayed with Applicant until 2005. Applicant contributed to the funeral expenses of her 
sister, niece, and brother-in-law, who passed away between 2005 and 2008. Applicant’s 
husband was also unemployed for extended periods, and Applicant’s employer cut her 
overtime opportunities.2  
 
 Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy petition listed $161,104 in claims under Schedule D, 
Creditors Holding Secured Claims. Under Schedule E, Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Priority Claims, the petition listed $500 in attorney’s fees. Debts totaling $19,953 were 
listed under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims. One of the 
listed debts was $8,652 for the deficiency due on an auto loan after the vehicle was 
repossessed.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 30, 44, 46, 53; GE 1, 4. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-20, 27-31, 43, 51-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4; AE A, B. 
 
3 AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant did not pay her federal taxes for 2010 when they were due. She 
completed a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service and paid the taxes in 2013 
or early 2014.4 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in February 2014. She converted the case 
or refiled it as a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured 
Claims, the petition listed $218,202 in claims. Applicant noted under Debtor’s Statement 
of Intent that her home would be “Surrendered.” There were no unsecured priority 
claims.5 Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the 
petition listed debts totaling $63,086. Applicant’s debts were discharged in June 2014.6 
 
 Applicant discussed her house and mortgage loan as part of the reason she filed 
bankruptcy in 2014: 
 
I decided that I was going to just go ahead and just move out of the house 
and just, you know, surrender the house and get a fresh start, because I 
think that was one of the problems that led up to this time as well.7   
 
 Despite the statement of intent in the bankruptcy that she would surrender the 
house, Applicant is still living in the home. She testified that her family would be moving 
out of the house in March 2015 because she received notice that the house was 
scheduled to be auctioned. She has not paid any rent since the bankruptcy discharge, 
and she did not pay the mortgage loan for several years before the discharge. Her 
credit reports list the date of last activity on the mortgage loan as October 2009. She 
testified that she received a letter about four months before the hearing telling her that 
she would have to move out soon, but she indicated that she stayed because “I guess I 
was figuring I had a little time until they told me to get out.”8 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of her bankruptcy. She 
testified that her finances have improved. Her husband was unemployed, but he was 
scheduled to return to work on February 16, 2015. She has health insurance and 
participates in a health-care fund, which should eliminate any future medical debts. She 
owes about $30,000 in student loans. She stated that she is current on her payments of 
about $300 a month. She bought a 2008 car after her bankruptcy discharge. She stated 
that she paid $12,000 for the car, with a $1,000 payment and an $11,000 loan.9 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4; AE C. 
 
5 Applicant’s student loans were not listed in the bankruptcy petition, most likely an inadvertent omission 
by her attorney. Student loans are generally not discharged in bankruptcy. See AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 20-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE A, F. 
 
7 Tr. at 20. 
 
8 Tr. at 37-42. 
 
9 Tr. at 24-25, 34-35, 44-49, 52; AE D. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. She filed multiple bankruptcy petitions. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed her initial financial problems to giving birth to her child 
without medical insurance. She then took in her sister’s children for about two years. 
 
6 
 
She contributed to the funeral expenses for family members between 2005 and 2008. 
Her husband also had periods of unemployment. Those events were beyond her 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant paid her delinquent taxes in 2013 or 2014. Her dischargeable debts 
were discharged in June 2014.10 She still has about $30,000 in student loans, which she 
is apparently paying. She also has a car loan. She testified that she “surrendered” her 
house in the bankruptcy, with any deficiency discharged. While she may have 
“surrendered” the house through the bankruptcy court, Applicant was still living in it in 
February 2015, seven months after the bankruptcy discharge.  
 
 A fundamental goal of the federal bankruptcy laws enacted by Congress is to 
give debtors a financial “fresh start” from burdensome debts.11 The Supreme Court 
made this point about the purpose of the bankruptcy law in a 1934 decision: 
 
[I]t gives to the honest but unfortunate debtor . . . a new opportunity in life 
and a clear field for future effort, unhampered by the pressure and 
discouragement of preexisting debt.12 
 
 Applicant required a third bankruptcy in 2014 despite receiving a fresh start 
through two previous bankruptcies and not paying her mortgage loan or rent for years. I 
am not convinced that she will take full advantage of her latest fresh start and not slip 
into further financial difficulties. 
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that she made a good-faith effort to pay all her debts.13 Her financial issues are recent. 
                                                          
10 The Government is not precluded from considering the negative security implications of an applicant’s 
overall history of financial difficulties merely because the applicant exercises the right to seek a discharge 
of debts in bankruptcy. See, e.g., ISCR Case 08-00435 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 22, 2009). 
 
11 See http://www.uscourts.gov/FederalCourts/Bankruptcy/BankruptcyBasics/Process.aspx.  
12 Local Loan Co. v. Hunt, 292 U.S. 234, 244 (1934). 
13 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [AG ¶ 20(b)], an applicant must present evidence 
showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a 
showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely 
show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to 
claim the benefit of [AG ¶ 20(b)].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
They continue to cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) is 
applicable because Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his 
bankruptcy. The second part is partially applicable because the bankruptcy resolved 
many of her financial problems. AG ¶ 20(d) is only applicable to the paid income taxes. I 
find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
  
I also considered Applicant’s stable work history. Applicant’s efforts at helping 
her family are commendable. However, she has a long history of financial problems. 
Her current financial situation appears stable, but that stability will be tested when 
Applicant finally moves out of her “surrendered” home. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
