 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-01565 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his use of marijuana and minor 
offenses that he committed while in college. He has not used marijuana or been 
involved in other criminal activity in the past five years. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the criminal conduct guideline (Guideline J).1 On July 3, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR, affirmatively waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision 
regarding his suitability for a clearance on the written record. Department Counsel did 
not move for a hearing.  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On October 27, 2014, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed 
findings of fact, argument, and five exhibits. Applicant elected not to submit a response 
or objections to the FORM. Therefore, Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5 are admitted 
into evidence without objection.2 On January 30, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to withdraw allegation 1.a. 
(FORM, n. 5) The motion, without opposition, is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact:3 
 
 Applicant bought and used marijuana while in high school and college. He 
graduated from high school in 2004. During his freshman year in college, Applicant’s 
parents convinced him to go to counseling for his marijuana use. He continued to use 
marijuana until 2010. He was arrested and convicted of several minor offenses while in 
college, to include marijuana possession and public drunkenness. The record does not 
reflect any other arrests or involvement with illegal activity since 2010.  
 
 In 2011, Applicant earned his undergraduate degree and graduated from college. 
After graduation, Applicant was employed as an engineer until being laid off by his 
former employer in May 2013. He returned to school to pursue a graduate degree. He 
secured employment with his current employer in December 2013. He submitted a 
security clearance application (SCA) in connection with his current job. This is 
Applicant’s first application for a security clearance. He disclosed his past drug use, 
police record, and other pertinent background information in response to questions in 
the SCA. He is now 28 years old, never married, and has no children.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
                                                          
2 Gx. 5 is a summary of Applicant’s security clearance background interview from February 6, 2014. 
Department Counsel conceded that the information reported in the summary “may not be entirely correct, 
or up to date.” (FORM, n. 1) Accordingly, I have given this document less weight. 
 
3 In reaching the above findings of fact, I have made only those reasonable inferences supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence. 
 
3 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4 However, as the Appeal Board has unequivocally 
held, there is no per se rule in security clearance cases requiring disqualification. A 
judge must decide each case based on its own merits.5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.6 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
4 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
5 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
6 See, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect 
and safeguard classified information). See also, ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (The “Adjudicative 
Guidelines are designed to predict. The prediction in nonsecurity violation cases is made by identifying 
and then evaluating behaviors or circumstances that have an articulable nexus to the ability or willingness 
to safeguard classified information.”) (emphasis in original). 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern regarding criminal conduct is explained at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s past criminal conduct, to include his marijuana involvement, raises 
this security concern. It also triggers application of the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the 
criminal conduct concern. The evidence raised the following mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s past criminal conduct was limited to his youth. He has not been 
involved in criminal activity, to include illegal drug involvement, since 2010. Although the 
counseling he received his freshman year in college had no immediate impact, five 
years have passed since he last used marijuana or was involved in criminal activity. In 
those five years, Applicant earned an undergraduate degree, graduated from college, 
and worked in his chosen profession. He has now returned to school to pursue a 
graduate degree while continuing to work as an engineer. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
 
5 
 
 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline J 
and highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant voluntarily disclosed the 
adverse information that formed the basis of the SOR. His honesty and the maturity he 
has shown over the past five years demonstrate that he now possess the reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment required of those granted a security clearance. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.g:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
