 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-032191 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence or foreign preference 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. DOD acted under Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on November 10, 2014, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
                                                          
1 The Statement of Reasons (SOR) erroneously captioned this case as “ISCR Case: 14-03219.” 
 
 
2 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 6, 2015. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and he received it on January 26, 2015. Applicant was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
He declined to submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on 
March 16, 2015.   
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts 
concerning the Russian Federation (Russia).2 Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents that verify details and provide context for these facts in the Administrative 
Notice request. See the Russia section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, 
Department Counsel’s material facts on Russia.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. The 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a government contractor. He works as an 
information technology consultant and has held that position since November 2003. He 
attended high school in Russia until 1991, served one year of mandatory military service 
in Russia, and entered the United States in 1998. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2005. He retained his Russian citizenship and passport. He is married and his wife is 
a dual citizen of Russia and the United States. She was naturalized in January 2013.5  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a defense investigator in March 2013. He told the 
investigator that he used his Russian passport for travel to Russia because it made 
traveling easier. Since gaining U.S. citizenship, he traveled to Russia in 2005-2008 and 
2010-2012. If asked to give up his Russian passport or renounce his Russian 
citizenship, he would not do so. He admitted that his allegiance and loyalty was to 
                                                          
2 Item 6. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
5 Items 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
Russia. His Russian passport was due to expire in August 2013. There is no evidence 
in the record that it was not renewed.6  
 
 Applicant has the following relatives and friends who are residents and/or citizens 
of Russia:  
 
 1. His wife as stated above is a dual citizen of the United States and Russia. She 
is eligible for medical, retirement, and social welfare benefits from Russia.7  
 
 2. His mother. His mother is a retired accountant. He speaks to her by telephone 
weekly and sees her yearly.8 
 
 3. His father-in-law and mother-in-law. He has quarterly contact with his father-in-
law and his mother-in-law and sees them yearly when he travels to Russia.9    
 
 4. Eight friends who are residents and citizens of Russia. Applicant listed three of 
his Russian friends as references on his security clearance application. He told the 
defense investigator about five more friends that he has ongoing contact with and whom 
he is bound by affection.10  
 
Russia: 
 
 Russia’s intelligence services are conducting a range of activities to collect 
economic information and technology from US targets, and Russia remains one of the 
most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive US economic information and 
technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include 
targeting of US visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having 
access to sensitive information. Two trends that may increase Russia’s threat over the 
next several years are that many Russian immigrants with advanced technical skills 
who work for leading U.S. companies may be increasingly targeted for recruitment by 
the Russian intelligence services; and a greater number of Russian companies affiliated 
with the intelligence services will be doing business in the United States. 
 
 Russia’s extensive and sophisticated intelligence operations are motivated by 
Russia’s high dependence on natural resources, the need to diversify its economy, and 
the belief that the global economic system is tilted toward the U.S. at the expense of 
Russia. As a result, Russia’s highly capable intelligence services are using human 
                                                          
6 Items 4-5. 
 
7 Items 4-5. 
 
8 Items 4-5. 
 
9 Items 4-5. 
 
10 Items 4-5. 
 
 
4 
 
intelligence (HUMINT), cyber, and other operations to collect economic information and 
technology to support Russia’s economic development and security. 
 
 On June 28, 2010, the U.S. Department of Justice announced the arrests of ten 
alleged secret agents for carrying out long-term, deep-cover assignments on behalf of 
Russia. Within weeks, all ten defendants pleaded guilty in federal court and were 
immediately expelled from the United States. On January 18, 2011, convicted spy and 
former CIA employee Harold Nicholson, currently incarcerated following a 1997 
espionage conviction, was sentenced to an additional 96 months of imprisonment for 
money laundering and conspiracy to act as an agent of the Russian government for 
passing information to the Russian government between 2006 and December 2008. 
 
 Beyond collection activities and espionage directed at the United States, Russia 
has provided various military and missile technologies to other countries of security 
concern, including China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. Continuing concerns about U.S. 
missile defense plans will reinforce Russia’s reluctance to engage in further nuclear 
arms reductions and Russia is unlikely to support additional sanctions against Iran. 
Russian intelligence and security services continue to target Department of Defense 
interests in support of Russian security and foreign policy objectives. 
 
 Although Russian law allows officials to enter a private residence only in cases 
prescribed by federal law or on the basis of judicial decision, authorities did not always 
observe these restrictions in practice. Problems remain due to allegations that 
government officials and others engaged in electronic surveillance without judicial 
permission and entered residences and other premises without warrants. The Russian 
government also requires that telephone and cellular companies grant the Ministry of 
Interior and the Federal Security Service (FSB) 24-hour remote access to their client 
databases, as well as requiring telecommunications companies and Internet service 
providers to provide dedicated lines to the security establishment, enabling police to 
track private e-mail communications and monitoring Internet activity. 
 
 In March 2014, Russian forces occupied the Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine, in 
support of Russia’s claim of Crimean annexation. The United States and Ukraine do not 
recognize this annexation through illegal military intervention by Russia. The Russian 
Federation maintains an extensive military presence in Crimea and along the border of 
Eastern Ukraine. In March 2014, the U.N. General Assembly approved a resolution 
affirming Ukraine’s territorial integrity and terming the March 16th referendum on 
annexation in Crimea illegitimate. Russian authorities are requiring that non-Russian 
citizens obtain a Russian visa to enter Crimea.11 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
                                                          
11 Item 6 (and source documents). 
 
 
5 
 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concern about “foreign contacts and 
interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
  
The mere possession of close family ties with family members or friends living in 
Russia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one friend or relative living in a foreign 
country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
 
7 
 
States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship of 
Russia with the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his relatives and 
friends living in Russia do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist his relatives or friends living in Russia who might be coerced by 
governmental entities.   
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
and friends who are living in Russia. Applicant communicates with his relatives on a 
regular basis and visits them yearly. He also stated that he has ties of affection for his 
Russian friends. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection 
for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to 
rebut this presumption. Given Russia’s hostility toward the United States and its efforts 
to obtain intelligence from U.S. sources, Applicant’s relationships with his relatives and 
friends living in that country are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(c) applies 
because Applicant resides with his wife.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s current position could cause him to be 
placed in a position to choose between the interests of his friends and relatives, and 
those of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. Applicant stated his loyalties 
remain with Russia even though he is now a U.S. citizen. The evidence does not 
support that he has deep seated loyalties toward the United States. AG ¶ 8(c) does not 
apply given the extensive contact he has with friends and family and his loyalty toward 
Russia. 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the foreign preference trustworthiness concern: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; . . . (7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen with Russia and refuses to renounce that citizenship. 
Even after gaining U.S. citizenship in 2005, he continued to use his Russian passport to 
enter Russia in 2005-2008 and 2010-2012. He does not intend to discontinue using his 
Russian passport. It was set to expire in 2013, but there is no evidence in the record 
that it was not renewed. AG ¶ 10(a) applies.  
 
I also considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and determined the 
following are potentially applicable under this guideline:  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
As discussed above, Applicant refused to renounce his Russian citizenship or 
discontinue using his foreign passport. I find mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 
11(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness determination by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support denying Applicant’s access to sensitive information are more significant than 
the factors weighing towards granting his access to sensitive information at this time. I 
considered his continued stated loyalty to Russia and his close ties with friends and 
family there. He has not demonstrated longstanding loyalty to this country even though 
he gained citizenship in 2005. Therefore, he provided insufficient evidence to mitigate 
the trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under 
Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
