 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00226    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank. Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant has 
demonstrated a preference for the United States, he failed to mitigate the foreign 
influence concerns raised by his relationship with his mother and siblings who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on November 5, 2014. A complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 15, 2014. He timely 
submitted Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A, which is admitted without objection.2 The items 
appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7. The case was assigned to me on January 14, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was 
approved. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
The supporting documentation is appended to the record as AP Ex. I – VI. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, has worked for a federal contractor as a linguist supporting U.S. 
troops abroad since July 2010. Applicant was born in Afghanistan, a country located in 
southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran borders it on the 
west and Russia on the north. With a population of 18 million people, Afghanistan is 
presently an Islamic Republic that has had a turbulent political history. After the 
Russians withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, 
and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% 
of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies. In October 2001, U.S. 
forces and coalition partners led military operations in the country, forcing the Taliban 
out of power by November 2001. The new democratic government took power in 2004 
after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. The country’s human rights record 
remains poor. Problems include extrajudicial killings; widespread official impunity; 
official corruption; and violence and societal discrimination against women. Violence is 
rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. No 
section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.3 
 
                                                          
2 Department Counsel’s memorandum regarding Applicant’s FORM response is appended to the record 
as Appellate Exhibit (Ap Ex.) VII. 
 
3 GE 4; Ap Ex. I-VI. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2002 to attend college. He has 
obtained both undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering from a U.S. 
university and is currently working on his doctorate.  Applicant has never married and 
has no children. After completing his master’s degree in 2005, Applicant worked in a 
variety of engineering-related jobs at his university and with a private firm. He decided 
to become a linguist after being recruited for the position.4  
 
Shortly after completing his first security clearance application in July 2010, 
Applicant completed a counterintelligence (CI) interview during which he provided 
information about his mother and seven siblings who were living in Afghanistan. His 
father is deceased. Applicant disclosed that he sent $300 to his mother every other 
month. His mother, 59, does not work outside the home. At the time of the CI interview, 
Applicant’s siblings ranged in age from 13 to 27 years old and were all in various levels 
of school. One of Applicant’s brothers attended graduate school in the United States 
through a prestigious scholarship program. Before studying in the United States, that 
brother worked for the Afghanistan government. Applicant last visited his family in 
Afghanistan in 2009. He speaks to his mother by telephone at least once per month and 
his siblings at least once every other month. Based on the information Applicant 
provided during the interview and the corresponding records check, the investigator 
concluded that Applicant does not pose a counterintelligence or foreign preference risk.5  
 
Currently, four of Applicant’s siblings are still in school in Afghanistan. His oldest 
sister is a teacher. One of his brothers is an attorney and has recently moved to India. 
The brother, who completed his graduate education in the United States, returned to 
Afghanistan as required by the terms of his scholarship and resumed working in the 
government. According to Applicant, this brother has recently returned to the United 
States. Applicant did not provide any additional information about the circumstances of 
his brothers’ emigration from Afghanistan. On occasion, Applicant still sends money to 
his mother to help with expenses.6  
 
Since becoming a linguist, Applicant has lived and worked overseas, embedded 
with U.S troops. He has served six deployments, which have included multiple missions 
in hostile territory. On his bi-annual breaks, Applicant returns to the U.S. city he 
considers his home base. When he is state side, Applicant spends time with his friends 
and visits with his university professors. Applicant considers the United States his 
home. Although Applicant does not own a home, all of his financial assets, which he 
estimates to be approximately $450,000, are in the United States.7  
 
 
 
                                                          
4 GE 4, 7. 
 
5 GE 7.  
 
6 GE 2; AE A.  
 
7 AE A.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
  “Foreign contacts . . . may be a security concern if the individual has divided 
loyalties . . ., may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”8 Applicant admits that his mother and five 
of his siblings are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He also admits that he has two 
brothers who are also citizens of Afghanistan, but have immigrated to India and the 
United States, respectively. 
 
While the mere possession of close ties with foreign family members or friends is 
not disqualifying as a matter of law, a close relationship with even one person living in a 
foreign country is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. A close relationship with a 
person who is a resident and citizen of a foreign country can be disqualifying if the 
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion; or if the relationship could create a potential conflict of interest 
between the applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology, and his 
desire to help a foreign person.9 In completing this calculus, evaluating the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
is essential. Perilous conditions exist in Afghanistan due to the operation of the Taliban 
the widespread corruption within the government that once employed Applicant’s 
brother, the poor human rights record, and the risk of terrorism, especially toward 
women teaching or pursing education. As such, a heightened risk exists. 
 
Although Applicant has demonstrated a strong preference for the United States 
over Afghanistan, he has not presented enough information to mitigate the foreign 
influence concern raised by his familial relationships with his mother and siblings who 
are citizens and residents of that country and his two brothers who remain citizens of 
the same. Applicant failed to demonstrate that his family members’ activities inside 
Afghanistan make it unlikely that Applicant will ever have to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual group, organization, or government and U.S. interests. 
This inquiry is not satisfied by Applicant’s statements that his family is pro-American or 
apolitical. Nor is the risk mitigated by the fact that Applicant’s brother, who was 
employed by the Afghanistan government, has immigrated to the United States. While 
the Government does not have to prove that the government of Afghanistan or the 
terrorist groups operating within its borders have threatened or approached Applicant’s 
relatives, the systematic human rights violations and the ever present danger from 
terrorists and those who seek to damage U.S. interests cannot be ignored. 
 
Applicant’s contacts with his family, though infrequent, cannot be considered 
casual. Furthermore, Applicant has not presented evidence of deep and longstanding 
ties to the United States to support a finding that he can be expected to resolve any 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 6.  
 
9 AG ¶¶ 7(a) – (b). 
 
 
6 
 
potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Accordingly, none of the 
foreign preference mitigating conditions apply. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. In his efforts to support the United States in its missions 
abroad, Applicant has placed his own safety in jeopardy. The level of commitment he 
shows to his work as a translator is indicative of his loyalty to the United States. 
However, the circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
significant than the factors weighing towards approval of his clearance at this time. 
Under the “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, an applicant has a 
heavy burden of demonstrating extenuation or mitigation of facts with negative security 
significance. Because he failed to meet his burden, I have no choice but to resolve any 
doubt about Applicant’s security worthiness in favor of the national security.10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 99-0601at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2001);  ISCR Case No. 99-0511at 8-9 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2000); ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 15, 1999); Dorfmont v. Brown, 914 F.2d 1399, 
1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)(no presumption in favor of granting or continuing a 
security clearance); Directive, Item E2.2.2. (any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security). 
 
