 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03257 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 9, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted on a delinquent home equity line of credit (HELOC) in the approximate amount 
of $57,614. This debt became delinquent as a result of circumstances beyond his 
control, and he is acting responsibly under the circumstances. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 22, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 11, 2014, scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On February 
5, 2015, and February 17, 2015, Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE A 
through AE O. Department Counsel had no objection to AE A through AE O, and they 
were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
January 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for the past three years. He enlisted in the Navy at the age of 18, and 
served eight years. He achieved the rank of petty officer first class, E6. He worked for 
two different government contractors from 2006 to 2011. He estimated he has held a 
security clearance for at least ten years, without incident. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2006 and a master’s degree in 2008. He is not married and has no children. 
(GE 1; Tr. 15-17, 22-28.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant is indebted on a delinquent home equity line-of-
credit (HELOC) in the approximate amount of $57,614. Applicant admitted the debt 
listed in the SOR, with explanations. His debt is found in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debt to a unique set of circumstances that left 
him unable to repay the HELOC loan. In April 2002 Applicant met and became 
romantically involved with his former partner [P]. The two began cohabitation shortly 
thereafter. In December 2003 they purchased a home together, titled in both of their 
names. They financed the property with a mortgage for $201,000, in both names. In 
February 2005, they obtained a $50,000 HELOC to rehabilitate the home. The HELOC 
was in both of their names. They both paid the mortgage and HELOC until July 2008, 
when they temporarily separated. Applicant continued paying the mortgage and HELOC 
on the property without financial assistance from P. (AE B, Tr. 29-34, 51-53.) 
 
 In August 2009, their relationship ended in a tumultuous break-up. Applicant 
moved out of the home and hired a property management company to rent the home to 
tenants. P had previously vacated the home. In March 2010 the house rented for $1,500 
per month, which did not cover the combined amount of the mortgage of $1,350 per 
month and the HELOC payment of $350 per month. Applicant paid approximately $530 
per month of his money toward the two loans. In July through October 2010, P 
contacted the property manager and threatened her. In October 2011 P visited the 
house and tried to evict the tenants. The Sheriff was called and P was removed from 
the property. P then notified the property manager that he was due half of the rent. The 
 
3 
 
property manager began remitting half of the rent to P, leaving Applicant an even larger 
shortfall, which he could not afford. (AE A; AE B; AE D; AE L; Tr. 34-44.) 
 
 In November 2011 Applicant decided that he had no choice but to stop paying on 
the mortgage and the HELOC. He could not sell the property because P refused to 
agree to a sale, and his mortgage was more than the value of the house. Applicant 
created an escrow account with the property manager to collect and store the rent paid 
by the tenants, for the tenants moving costs and to pay on any remaining debt at the 
end of the foreclosure process. P discovered the escrow account, and took half of the 
money saved. The house was foreclosed upon in January 2012. The primary mortgage 
was satisfied in full through the foreclosure sale. It is unclear if any money was paid on 
the HELOC at the time of the foreclosure. (AE B; AE K; Tr. 40-44.) 
 
P filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2012. P included both the mortgage 
and the HELOC in his bankruptcy. Applicant was informed by the lender that when P 
discharged his bankruptcy, the HELOC was included and was considered closed. 
Applicant’s credit reports reflect this debt as a charged-off account. (GE 3; AE B; Tr. 34-
36.) 
 
 Applicant talked to the HELOC lender in 2012 and requested to set up a payment 
plan, because the debt was still listed on his credit report. Applicant was unable to pay 
the requested settlement amount at that time. However, he is currently making 
payments to the same creditor who holds the HELOC, on a credit card debt that once 
totaled over $40,000. Applicant provided documentation to show he created a debt 
management plan and has been repaying the credit card debt consistently for several 
years. Applicant participated in budget and debt counseling that helped him create the 
debt management plan. His credit score is considered “good” by a credit reporting 
agency. His credit report reflects no other delinquencies. Applicant intends to address 
the HELOC debt and hopes to reach a settlement for a significantly reduced payment 
with the lender, but his discretionary income is currently used for the repayment of the 
credit card debt. (AE C; AE E; AE L; Tr. 46-50.) 
 
 Applicant was awarded numerous commendations during his Navy career, 
including: the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal; the Navy Unit 
Commendation; Meritorious Unit Commendation; Navy “E” Ribbon; Navy and Marine 
Corps Good Conduct Medal; and the National Defense Service Medal. His evaluation 
reports from his naval service reflect that he “impressed every person that he comes in 
contact with” and that he typically performed above standards. He was considered a 
valuable asset to his division. Applicant is also considered to be a valued employee by 
the government contractor for which he works. In 2012, 2013, and 2014, he received 
merit-based increases in pay. He also received compensation awards ranging between 
$1,000 and $3,000 for his work performance in 2011, 2012, and 2013. His performance 
reviews show he is recognized as a future leader of his organization (AE F; AE G; AE H; 
AE I; AE J; AE M; AE N; Tr. 26-27.) 
  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent home equity line of credit (HELOC) in the 
approximate amount of $57,614. This debt has been delinquent since November 2011. 
The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant’s inability to pay his HELOC loan was the direct result of P’s 
malfeasance, a circumstance beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant did everything he 
 
6 
 
could, including establishing an escrow account toward the repayment of the mortgage 
and HELOC loans upon foreclosure, when he found himself unable to keep up with 
those loans. That escrow account was invaded by P. Applicant’s HELOC debt occurred 
under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his 
current judgment. He has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He completed 
financial counseling, and established a plan to repay his credit card debt first, before 
addressing the HELOC delinquency. Given his history of honorable service to the 
United States and his documented history of repaying his credit card debt with the same 
creditor, he can be relied upon address the HELOC debt when sufficient funds are 
available. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant served in the Navy for eight years and received an honorable discharge. He 
received a number of awards and other positive recognition for his work in the military 
and as a government contractor. He is a valued employee. Applicant was approximately 
25 years old when he and his partner purchased the home in question. He has matured 
since then and has learned a difficult lesson. He has established good credit, despite 
the delinquent HELOC. He pays all of his other bills on time, as evidenced by his credit 
reports. The delinquent HELOC was an aberrational event in his life and he is unlikely to 
be in this situation again. He can be trusted to resolve the HELOC after he has finished 
paying the credit card, and has additional disposable income. 
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
