 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01789 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control. 
Although he has significant debt, Applicant demonstrated financial responsibility 
handling his financial problems by communicating with creditors, and making payments 
consistent with his financial ability. Considering the circumstances of this particular 
case, Applicant’s financial problems do not show he currently lacks judgment, reliability, 
or trustworthiness. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 19, 
2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) on June 27, 
2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 24, 2014, and requested a hearing 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). The case was assigned to another administrative judge on October 20, 2014. 
Applicant was unavailable for his hearing, and the case was reassigned to me on 
December 1, 2014. DOHA issued the notice of hearing on December 11, 2014, 
scheduling a hearing for January 14, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant 
testified and presented three exhibits (AE) 1 through 3. AE 2 and 3 were received post-
hearing. All exhibits were admitted without objection and made part of the record. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 23, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR factual allegations with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make 
the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old field service technician. He requires a security 
clearance to retain his job with a defense contractor. Applicant married his wife in 1995, 
and they have two children, ages 16 and 13. He graduated from high school and has 
completed some college courses. Additionally, he completed a U.S. Navy technical 
school, and received his journeyman electrician certification in 2008. 
 
Applicant enlisted in the Army National Guard in 1983 and was honorably 
discharged in January 1985. He immediately enlisted in the U.S. Navy where he served 
as a submariner from 1985 to 1995. He was honorably discharged as an electronics 
technician second class (E-5). While in the Navy, Applicant possessed a top secret 
clearance. There is no evidence of any security violations or security concerns while in 
the service. 
 
Applicant’s job history indicates that after his service discharge, he worked in the 
semiconductor industry until 2003, when he was laid off. He then entered a five-year 
apprenticeship and worked as a journeyman electrician from 2003 to 2009. By 2009, he 
was earning around $80,000 a year. He was laid off because of the downturn of the 
U.S. economy and was unemployed between August 2009 and December 2010. 
 
Applicant was employed from January 2011 to October 2012. However, he was 
making only about $33,000 a year. He was again laid off, and was unemployed between 
October 2012 and February 2013. Applicant was hired by his current employer, a 
government contractor, in February 2013. 
 
In 1998, when he was earning about $80,000 a year, Applicant and his wife 
purchased a home. The home was financed with a first mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a 
second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b). While employed, Applicant and his wife’s combined 
incomes were sufficient to pay the mortgages, debts, and their living expenses. While 
 
3 
 
 
unemployed, Applicant used his savings and retirement accounts to pay the mortgages 
for some time. However, the lengthy periods of unemployment exhausted his savings 
and retirement accounts, and his mortgages and other credit accounts became 
delinquent. Applicant maintained contact with his creditors, but he did not have the 
financial means to pay his family’s living expenses and his debts.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2013 SCA that he had an outstanding debt to the IRS 
and a $10,000 delinquent credit card account. Concerning the IRS debt, he explained 
that he and his wife always filed their income tax returns on time, but they made a 
mistake in their 1999 income tax return and acquired the debt. Shortly after they were 
notified of their debt, Applicant established a payment plan and has been making 
payments since. 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the seven delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR totaling over $31,000. He would like to pay the debts, but lacks the 
financial means to support his family and pay all the debts at the same time. His wife 
has been continuously employed, and she took care of the home finances when 
Applicant was unemployed. Her income is $33,000 a year. He and his wife were paying 
one debt at a time. However, both his and his wife’s salary were garnished by creditors, 
and he had no choice but to file for bankruptcy protection because he could not afford 
the payments. 
 
Applicant retained an attorney to help him file for bankruptcy protection and 
participated in the required financial counseling. The attorney expected that Applicant 
would be released of all his dischargeable debts in February 2015. The bankruptcy filing 
includes the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.g. Applicant and his family have 
made lifestyle changes to save money and pay their debts. They no longer use credit 
cards, and only purchase their living necessities. They do not go out to eat, or go to the 
movies, or incur frivolous expenses. They are living from paycheck to paycheck.  
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence to show that he has been paying the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a through a wage garnishment. As of August 2014, he had paid 
close to $7,000. He believes that as of his hearing date (January 2015), the debt was 
paid. Applicant intends to start paying the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b when he no longer 
has to pay the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The credit reports show that he has paid other 
debts not alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his financial situation. He believes that 
with his and his wife’s income, and the pending bankruptcy discharge, he and his wife 
will be able to regain control of their financial situation. He understands that he is 
required to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance. A 
review of Applicant’s credit reports shows that he is living within his financial means. 
There is no evidence of any additional delinquent debts. Applicant was candid and 
upfront during the security clearance investigation process.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
After 12 years of honorable military service, Applicant experienced substantial 
periods of unemployment and underemployment. Without sufficient earnings, his 
mortgages and credit accounts became delinquent, and he accumulated the seven 
debts alleged in the SOR totaling close to $31,000. Financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. Applicant’s financial 
problems were the result of his inability to pay the debts, and not because of his 
unwillingness to do so. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) has partial applicability because Applicant’s financial problems are 
recent and ongoing. However, I find that his financial problems occurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is fully applicable because his financial problems were caused by 
circumstances beyond his control. As a result of the U.S. financial and real estate 
downturns, Applicant was laid off and was unemployed and underemployed for 
significant periods. Applicant maintained communications with his creditors, continued 
to pay his delinquent debts in proportion to his financial resources, and used his savings 
and retirement accounts to pay his debts and to support his family. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) 
are partially applicable. He received financial counseling through the bankruptcy 
process, and the credit reports show that he paid other debts not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is in a difficult financial situation. He is living from paycheck to 
paycheck and his wife’s income alone is insufficient for him to establish a viable 
payment plan to pay his debt. However, with the income from his current job and the 
anticipated bankruptcy discharge, he will have the financial means to address his debts 
and regain control of his financial situation. Applicant’s credit report shows that he is 
living within his means, and there is no evidence of any additional delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant honorably served 10 years of active service. He held sensitive 
positions of responsibility and possessed a top secret clearance. After his separation 
from the service, Applicant was financially responsible until he was laid off and 
underwent periods of unemployment and underemployment. Applicant’s financial 
problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control. He understands what is 
required of him to be eligible for a security clearance. With his current job income and 
the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant will regain control of his financial situation. His 
financial problems are unlikely to recur and do not show he currently lacks judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
