 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01845 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David McDowell, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline J, 
criminal conduct, and Guideline H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, and Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On September 12, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on December 15, 2014. At the request of Applicant, the case was moved to a different 
 
2 
 
 
location to accommodate his attorney, so it was reassigned to me on February 2, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 19, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 11, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 18, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with explanations. I have 
incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He is not married. He has a 16-year-old daughter from 
a previous relationship. He attended community college from 1999 to 2001 and worked 
at the same time to support his daughter. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2011 and is 
enrolled in a master’s program. He is working full-time and is taking nine hours of 
college courses. He has worked for his present employer since August 2013.1 
 
Applicant grew up without a father. His mother raised him and his two siblings. 
He stated that he grew up in a tough neighborhood and those with whom he grew up 
did not usually go to college. He stated that many of them were either dead, in jail, or on 
the streets and not working. Applicant admitted he had numerous contacts with law 
enforcement while he was living in his home town. He believes some of his arrests were 
attributed to being targeted at times.2  
 
Applicant admitted in January 2001 he was arrested and charged with domestic 
violence. He pled guilty and was fined $100 and court costs. He testified that he and the 
mother of his child were arguing because she wanted to move the child out of state. He 
denied assaulting her, but admitted he was “in her face.”3 He was arrested again in 
November 2001 for domestic violence again due to an incident with his child’s mother. 
They were arguing about where the child was to live. The charge was nolle prossed in 
April 2002. Applicant is now on good terms with the mother.4  
 
In May 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal mischief. In 
August 2002 the charge was nolle prossed. Applicant did not remember the specifics of 
this incident.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. 39-43, 81. 
 
2 Tr. 44-45, 86, 106-108. 
 
3 Tr. 94. 
 
4 Tr. 45-46, 92-94. 
 
5 Tr. 94-96. 
 
3 
 
 
In December 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence of liquor. In June 2003 he was found guilty and sentenced to 60 days in jail 
that was suspended, a $1,500 fine, and unsupervised probation for one year. Applicant 
admitted he made a mistake when he drove after consuming alcohol.6  
 
In April 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with domestic violence, 
assault, and cocaine possession. Applicant explained his girlfriend at the time claimed 
he had assaulted her, and he denied he did. She was angry because she had seen 
another girl’s name listed in his phone contacts. She called the police and told them 
Applicant had illegal drugs in his possession. The charges were nolle prossed.7 
 
In September 2005 Applicant was charged with trafficking cocaine. He was 
acquitted of the charges in April 2007. Applicant was attending college and had moved 
out of his mother’s house. His brother resided there. Applicant’s mother called Applicant 
while he was at school and told him the police were at the house and had arrested his 
brother. She asked Applicant to come home. When he arrived, he was confronted by 
the police who asked to search his car. He denied their request. He went into the house. 
He stated the police were threatening to arrest his mother. At the time, his mother was 
going through chemotherapy treatment due to a cancer diagnosis. Instead the police 
arrested Applicant. Both he and his brother were prosecuted. His brother was convicted. 
Applicant was acquitted. Applicant was not living at the house at the time of the drug 
arrest and was unaware that his brother had drugs in the house.8  
 
In May 2007 Applicant was arrested for domestic violence. He believes his 
girlfriend was bipolar and called the police. He was trying to leave and she began 
throwing things. He denied he assaulted her. He stated he had marks on his body 
where she scratched him. The charges were nolle prossed. He is no longer with this 
woman.9 
 
In December 2008 Applicant was arrested and charged with drugs-conspiracy to 
commit controlled substance act and obstruct police-obstructing government operations. 
He was found guilty of both charges at a trial held in March 2011. He was sentenced to 
12 years and 3 months in jail (suspended), four years’ probation and fines/court costs of 
$2,387.10  
  
With regard to his December 2008 arrest, Applicant denied he was attempting to 
sell cocaine to Person A. He explained he was at a local restaurant. Person A was 
employed at the restaurant. Applicant went to high school and played on the same 
                                                          
6 Tr. 46-48, 96-97. 
 
7 Tr. 97-99; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 99-104; GE 6. 
 
9 Tr. 104-106. 
 
10 Tr. 58-73; GE 7 and 8. 
 
4 
 
 
football team with him. They decided to meet after Person A got off work. They were 
sitting in Person A’s car when the police arrived. The police approached from the rear of 
the car and were outside of Applicant’s view. When Police Officer B opened the car 
door, Applicant attempted to close it because he did not know who was trying to open 
his car door. The police then pulled their guns. Drugs were found in Person A’s car. The 
police did not find drugs in Applicant’s car. The police found $2,100 in cash in 
Applicant’s car. He stated he was paying bills and buying Christmas presents at the 
time. Person A corroborated Applicant’s version of the facts at the trial.11  
 
In April 2013, Applicant’s conviction for drugs-conspiracy to commit controlled 
substance act was overturned by the State Supreme Court on the grounds the 
circumstantial evidence was insufficient to convict Applicant of conspiring to sell drugs, 
as nothing linked him to the drugs found in the alleged buyer’s vehicle, and although the 
cash that was found in Applicant’s car might suggest that he had engaged in some sort 
of drug-related transaction at some point, the State still did not prove that Applicant 
conspired to sell drugs. The charge of obstructing governmental operations was not 
considered in the appeal and was therefore not overturned.12  
 
Applicant was arrested on July 11, 2009, and charged with cocaine possession, 
resisting officer-resisting arrest, and traffic offense-running stop sign. Applicant 
explained he was sitting in his rental car outside of a club when Police Officer B arrived 
and began harassing people. Applicant believed this police officer targeted him because 
of his previous arrest. Police Officer B looked at Applicant’s license and told him there 
was a warrant on him for failing to stop at a stop sign. Police Officer B searched 
Applicant’s rental vehicle and claimed he found cocaine. Applicant denied he was in 
possession of any drugs. On July 13, 2009, two days after his arrest, Applicant was 
found guilty of running the stop sign and was sentenced to three days in jail (time 
served). The remaining charges were nolle prossed.13 
 
Applicant admitted that when he was younger he was in a bad environment and 
associated with the wrong people. He stated the community he lived in was surrounded 
by people who were uneducated and involved with drugs. He stated if you lived on the 
wrong side of town you were harassed by the police. His mother impressed on him the 
importance of getting an education. He tried marijuana when he was in high school. He 
never used cocaine. His brother smoked marijuana and was sent to jail for drug 
distribution. He was on the football team for four years. He was selected to be in Who’s 
Who in America when he was in high school.14  
 
                                                          
11 Tr. 58-73, 76-77. 
 
12 Tr. 77-79; GE 8. 
 
13 Tr. 74-76, 85-86; GE 9. 
 
14 Tr. 49-57, 87-92,107-108. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant completed his bachelor’s degree in the rigorous curriculum of electrical 
engineering. He is pursuing his master’s degree in computer science. He moved out of 
the city where he grew up. When he returns he does not visit friends from the 
neighborhood. He recognized that the people he was associated with from the town 
where he grew up with were a bad influence. He has worked hard to move beyond his 
past. He is trying to be a productive member of society. He participates in a mentoring 
program sponsored by his employer where he mentors children to show them there is 
hope and opportunity, and although he made mistakes in his past, he has overcome 
them. He encourages them to not make the mistake he made. He regrets things he did 
in his past, but it has made him appreciate his accomplishment and inspires him to be 
better and push himself harder. He regrets his past conduct. Applicant also volunteers 
at the food bank where he boxes food for the homeless. He visits his daughter twice a 
month and is current on his child support payments. He has passed drug tests 
administered by his employer.15  
 
Applicant received a certificate of recognition from his employer for his 
outstanding performance and invaluable contributions toward the successful completion 
of one of their programs. As a relatively new employee, his performance evaluation 
noted: “Applicant has grown this year. He has a good attitude, is willing to learn, and 
communicates well with the team. He is early in his career and is now experiencing a 
variety of different engineering areas that should broaden his skill base and knowledge 
of [employer’s] products.” The evaluation also noted that “his enthusiasm, courtesy 
toward others and genuine nature are appreciated.”16 
 
A coworker, who worked for the same employer for 38 years and has known 
Applicant for two years, provided a character letter. He stated Applicant is highly 
professional and trustworthy. He is impressed by Applicant’s strength of character and 
believes he is reliable and honest and would trust him with sensitive and classified 
information.17 
 
A character witness, who worked 34 years for the federal government, held a 
security clearance, and has been a pastor for 27 years provided testimony on behalf of 
Applicant. He has known Applicant for 17 years and was aware of his arrests. He stated 
Applicant worked with the youth of his church for six years before moving to a new city. 
He is a changed person and no longer associates with the same crowd. He is 
committed to his educational pursuits. Applicant has redirected his commitment and life 
and service to Christ. He tithe’s to his church. The witness acknowledged Applicant 
made mistakes, and Applicant shares that information with the youth of the church. He 
is a trusted member of the church. The witness noted that Applicant has modified his 
behavior, made positive changes, and is a productive member of society. Applicant no 
                                                          
15 Tr. 49-57, 80-81, 83, 108-121. 
 
16 AE B. 
 
17 AE C. 
 
6 
 
 
longer associates with people from his old neighborhood. He believes Applicant is 
trustworthy and recommended him for a security clearance.18  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
18 Tr. 26-37. 
 
7 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested nine times from 2001 to 2009 for misdemeanor and 
felony offenses. He was convicted of domestic violence once, DUI and the traffic 
offense of running a stop sign. He was also convicted of the felony offense conspiracy 
to commit controlled substance act and the misdemeanor of obstructing government 
operations. The felony conspiracy conviction was overturned on appeal for insufficient 
evidence. He was acquitted of trafficking cocaine. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
  
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he made mistakes when he was younger and was 
arrested numerous times. He took responsibility for the domestic violence, DUI, 
 
8 
 
 
obstructing the government, and running a stop light offenses for which he was 
convicted. His brother was convicted of trafficking cocaine. Applicant was acquitted 
because he did not live in the house where the drugs were found and was unaware they 
were present. He was attending college at the time and lived elsewhere. In 2008, he 
was charged with conspiracy to commit controlled substance act. He was accused of 
selling cocaine. The evidence was insufficient and his conviction was overturned by the 
State Supreme Court. Applicant denied he was selling drugs. He admitted that after the 
police opened the car door he shut it because he did not know who was attempting to 
get in the car.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he associated with the wrong people and lived in a 
community where the criminal element was prevalent. He denied he possessed or sold 
drugs, despite the criminal charges against him. Except for using marijuana in high 
school, he denied using any other illegal drugs. It has been almost six years since 
Applicant’s last arrest. In that time he has finished his bachelor’s degree in electrical 
engineering. He is currently working on his master’s degree. He moved to a new city 
and away from his former friends. He has been employed since 2013 and his 
performance evaluations reflect that he is doing relatively well for a new employee. He 
participates in a mentorship program through his employer helping kids understand the 
ramification of their choices. He volunteers at a food bank. He no longer associates with 
people involved in criminal activity.  
 
 Applicant’s difficulties with the mother of his child appear to be resolved, and they 
have a good relationship. He is no longer with the girlfriend who accused him of 
domestic violence. There have been no other alcohol-related incidents since his 2002 
DUI.  
 
 Through education, Applicant found a way out of a community where there was 
little hope or expectations for success. He made mistakes along the way, some that 
were serious. The question is has Applicant truly changed his ways; is he reformed; has 
he put his criminal past behind him and is he no longer involved in any criminal activity? 
For the past six years he has worked hard to move past his mistakes. He earns a good 
salary. He has always responsibly taken care of his child. He is pursuing further 
education and is giving back to the community by mentoring others. He has become a 
respectable member of society. I find enough time has passed that criminal behavior is 
unlikely to recur. There is considerable evidence of successful rehabilitation, including 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse for his mistakes, 
completion of his bachelor’s degree and working on his master’s degree, a good 
employment record, and constructive community involvement with his church and 
through a mentorship program sponsored by his employer. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) 
apply. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following has been raised: 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
Applicant was arrested in April 2004 for cocaine possession and the charge was 
nolle prossed in June 2004. He was charged with trafficking cocaine in 2005 and was 
acquitted of the charge. He was arrested in 2008 of conspiracy to commit controlled 
substance act. He was found guilty and this charge was overturned by the State 
Supreme Court for insufficient evidence. He was arrested again in July 2009 for cocaine 
possession and two days later the charge was nolle prossed. The above disqualifying 
condition applies. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant grew up and lived in a community where the criminal element was 
prevalent. He takes responsibility for his conduct, but also indicated that he believed he 
was being targeted. It is noted that he was twice arrested for possession of cocaine and 
the charges were nolle prossed shortly after his arrest, as were many of the charged 
offenses. Applicant was not convicted of any drug charges, but a conviction is not 
necessary for there to be a security concern. There is no evidence Applicant is a current 
drug abuser, despite his admission he tried marijuana in high school. The same facts 
and analysis that were applied under the criminal conduct guideline applies under the 
drug involvement guideline. It has been six years since Applicant’s last arrest. He lives 
 
10 
 
 
in a different city and no longer associates with former friends from his hometown. He 
has worked hard to overcome his mistakes and is now a valued employee. Applicant 
has an education and a good job. His employer conducts drug tests and his results 
were negative. It is unlikely he will be involved with drugs in the future. I find AG ¶ 26(a) 
applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 36-years-old father of a teenage daughter. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree and is working on a master’s degree. He is a valued employee who is involved 
in a mentoring program and has served his church. Applicant’s criminal background is 
noted above. It has been six years since Applicant’s last arrest. The question is has he 
really changed and can he be trusted. He has moved from the town where all of his 
problems occurred. He has a good job. He is pursuing higher education. Most 
importantly he acknowledges he made mistakes in the past and is committed to being a 
productive citizen. Applicant has done what society wants people to do when they get in 
trouble. In the past six years he has established a track record of being a reliable and 
trustworthy individual who exercises good judgment. He has matured and is a mentor to 
at risk children. He is not a perfect man, but he has worked hard to overcome his past. 
He has earned an opportunity to move beyond his past. He has met his burden of 
persuasion. Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
11 
 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the criminal conduct 
and drug involvement guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
