 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01859 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines K (handling 
protected information) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.1  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines K and E. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should 
be continued or revoked. 
                                                          
1
This case originated as a result of an Incident Report filed in the DOD Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System by Applicant’s employer on August 19, 2013. (Item 7.) 
 
2 
 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2014. He elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated January 23, 2015, was provided 
to him by letter dated January 26, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on February 2, 
2015. He was given 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information to which 
Department Counsel posed no objections. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 
2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c with explanations, 2.a, and admitted in 
part and denied in part 2.b with explanations. After a thorough review of the record, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old software engineer, who has worked for his current 
employer since September 1995. He worked for his company’s two predecessor 
companies and has accumulated over 35 years of employment with defense 
contractors. Applicant seeks to retain his top secret security clearance and access to 
sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI). (Item 4, Response to FORM.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1978. (Item 8.) He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in computer science and mathematics in 1982, and a master’s 
degree in computer science in 2013. (Response to FORM.) Applicant married in April 
1984. He has two adult children, a son and a daughter. Applicant did not serve in the 
armed forces. (Item 4.) 
 
Handling Protected Information/Personal Conduct 
 
This case originated following an incident report filed by Applicant’s employer in 
August 2013, relating to a security violation involving the Applicant. (Item 7.) On August 
9, 2013, Applicant’s was found to be in possession of a thumb drive during a random 
security inspection when leaving a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility 
(SCIF). The thumb drive was confiscated and secured by security personnel. At the 
time, Applicant stated that he did not know the thumb drive was in his pocket and that 
he needed a document that was on the disk. (Item 5.) 
 
Applicant later admitted to placing a personal thumb drive into a classified 
computer system that was located at an off-site location and downloading unclassified 
files onto the thumb drive for transfer to an unclassified system. Applicant also admitted 
to using the same thumb drive in two company laptops and a personal computer before 
and after it was used in the classified computer system. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b; SOR answer; 
Items 5, 6, 7, 8.) 
 
3 
 
 
After conducting an investigation, Applicant’s employer concluded that he was 
culpable of the unauthorized use of a personal thumb drive in a classified system as 
well as mishandling classified material. His employer further determined that Applicant 
had deliberately violated security requirements and was grossly negligent in the 
handling of classified material. On August 21, 2014, Applicant’s clearance and SCI 
access was suspended and he was assigned to work on unclassified programs only. He 
was also suspended for five days without pay, and debriefed from classified access. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c; Items 5, 6, 7, 8.) Applicant acknowledged to company security personnel 
that he had completed information assurance training and was aware that he was not 
authorized to use a thumb drive on a Government computer. (Item 5.) 
 
The SOR alleged that on August 9, 2013, Applicant made a false statement to 
company security personnel when he stated that he had not placed the thumb drive into 
any machine at the facility. He later explained that he was being responsive to 
questions asked at the time; however, he had placed the thumb drive into a classified 
computer at an off-site location and also two unclassified company laptops. (SOR ¶ 2.b; 
Items 5, 6, 7, 8.)  Applicant provided clarification that he did not make a false statement 
to company security personnel when questioned about the thumb drive.  
 
 As an explanation and not as an excuse, Applicant explained that he was under 
pressure to meet a customer deadline and acknowledged it was wrong to disregard 
proper security procedures to meet that deadline. He added that he had recently been 
informed that his father-in-law was being moved to an Alzheimer’s facility and that his 
mother was diagnosed with leukemia and was to start immediate treatments. In 
retrospect, he realizes the proper thing to do was a trusted download and that he should 
have followed established procedures.  He did not think he had enough time to properly 
complete the job and acknowledges that he was wrong. (Item 3.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Although Applicant did not submit any documentary character evidence, he 
stated that he has worked proudly for his company and two predecessor companies. He 
acknowledged his mistakes and regrets that “this security violation has left a blemish on 
what has otherwise been a stellar career of performance, service, and dedication to [his] 
company for the past 35 years.” (Response to FORM.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
4 
 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
                                                  
Handling Protected Information2 
 
AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 34 describes nine handling protected information that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two of those disqualifying conditions are applicable 
in this case: “(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved equipment 
including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or computer hardware, 
software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, “palm” or pocket device or other adjunct 
equipment;” and “(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
other sensitive information.” The Government established these conditions through 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. 
   
  AG ¶ 35 provides for three potentially applicable handling protected information 
mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and  
 
                                                          
2
The DOHA Appeal board has stated: “Security violations are one of the strongest possible 
reasons for denying or revoking access to classified information, as they raise very serious questions 
about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information.” ISCR Case No. 04-04264 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Sept. 8, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 3-4 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998)). Once it is established 
that Applicant has committed a security violation, he has “a very heavy burden of demonstrating that [he] 
should be entrusted with classified information. Because security violations strike at the very heart of the 
industrial security program, an Administrative Judge must give any claims of reform and rehabilitation 
strict scrutiny.” ISCR Case No. 0030 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 20, 2001). In many security clearance cases, 
applicants are denied a clearance for having an indicator of a risk that they might commit a security 
violation (e.g. alcohol abuse, delinquent debts or drug use).” ISCR Case No. 04-04264 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 8, 2006). In this case the Judge found more than an indicator or risk. Here the Judge found 
Applicant negligently disregarded in-place security procedures . . . . ISCR Case No. 03-26888 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 5, 2006). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
  
None of the handling protected information mitigating conditions are applicable. 
Applicant’s unauthorized use of a thumb drive in a classified system and mishandling of 
classified information is recent and serious. While Applicant acknowledges his mistake, 
I am at somewhat of a disadvantage in assessing his rehabilitation based on his written 
assertions. Apart from his SOR answer and Response to FORM, he did not produce 
any corroborating evidence of rehabilitation. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
            AG ¶ 16 describes seven personal conduct concerns that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. One of those disqualifying conditions is applicable in 
this case: “(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress such as (1) engaging 
in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing….“ The Government established this condition through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven potential conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s security violation is cross-alleged under Guideline E. None of the 
mitigating conditions under this concern are applicable for the reasons discussed under 
Guideline K. Applicant provided clarification that he did not make a false statement to 
company security personnel when questioned about the thumb drive. Also, Department 
Counsel noted in the FORM that Applicant had rebutted this falsification and 
recommended that SOR ¶ 2.b be resolved in Applicant’s favor. I concur with 
Department Counsel’s conclusion and recommendation and I find in his favor on SOR ¶ 
2.b. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). My comments in the Analysis 
section are incorporated in the whole-person discussion. 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his 35 
years of employment as a defense contractor. Apart from his statements of remorse, he 
provided no evidence corroborating rehabilitation. If other favorable evidence exists, 
Applicant did not provide it. A security breach of this nature is inconsistent with the 
standards required of those entrusted with holding a security clearance.  
 
Lastly, in requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on 
the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only several 
uncorroborated paragraphs of explanations, security concerns remain.  
   
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s concerns. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
