 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  ) 
 ----------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04669 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 12 delinquent judgments or 
collection debts totaling $15,142. She did not provide documentary evidence of any 
payments to address the SOR debts. She did not provide sufficient evidence of her 
progress resolving her SOR debts. Financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2014, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Item 4). On October 28, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a SOR 
to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). (Item 1) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.   
 
Based on information available to the Government, DOD adjudicators could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with national security 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, and it recommended that her case 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether her clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On November 19, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived 
her right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated January 13, 2015, was provided to her on January 26, 2015. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 16, 2015.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.l. (Item 3) 
Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old apprentice, who has worked at a construction facility 
since February 2014.2 In 2009, she earned a bachelor’s degree. She has served in the 
National Guard since October 2009. She was unemployed from February 2013 to 
September 2013. She married in July 2013, and she has one child, who was born in 
2012. 
  
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR and April 17, 2014 credit report allege 12 delinquent judgments, 
or collection debts totaling $15,142 as follows: 1.a is a judgment for $1,720; 1.b is a 
judgment for $11,417; 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j are six medical debts being collected 
by the same collection company for $423, $297, $190, $150, $150, and $127; 1.d is a 
telecommunication collection debt for $357; 1.f is a telecommunications collection debt 
for $200; and 1.k and 1.l are two debts being collected by the same collection company 
for $74 and $37.  
 
On her March 21, 2014 SF 86, Applicant disclosed the following 11 debts: 2010 
income tax debt for $1,962; judgments from an accident for $11,417 and $1,720; 
medical debts for $297, $190, $127, $150, $150, and $423; utility debt for $357; and a 
telecommunications debt for $200. (Item 4) She said she was making $75 monthly 
payments to address each of the two judgments for $11,417 and $1,962 resulting from 
an accident in 2008. (Item 4) She indicated she had insufficient funds to address the 
other SOR debts. She did not provide proof of any payments to any SOR creditors. 
 
The FORM advised Applicant that she needed to provide proof that she was 
making the $75 monthly payments on her two judgments as claimed in her SF 86 
because these two debts comprise more than 85 percent of her SOR debt. (FORM at 3-
                                            
1To protect Applicant and her family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
2The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s March 21, 2014 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Item 4).  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
4) Despite Department Counsel’s forewarning of the necessity to submit corroborating 
documentation of payments, no such evidence of payments was provided. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR alleges 12 
delinquent judgments or collection debts totaling $15,142. Applicant admitted her 
responsibility for all of the SOR debts. Her admissions are corroborated by her credit 
report. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply to all of her SOR debts. Nevertheless, 
there is some mitigating financial information. Applicant’s delinquent debt was affected 
by her vehicle accident, medical treatment, and unemployment. These are 
circumstances largely beyond her control under AG ¶ 20(b). Department Counsel 
emphasized in the FORM that Applicant needed to provide proof that she was making 
the $75 monthly payments to address each of her two judgments, as claimed in her SF 
86. Proof of these payments would have mitigated more than 85 percent of the SOR 
debts; however, Applicant did not provide proof of such payments.      
 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to any of her debts because she did not provide 
“documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.”   
 
 Applicant admitted responsibility for 12 delinquent judgments or collection debts 
totaling $15,142. She did not provide proof of any payments to address any of these 
debts, even though seven of them are for $200 or less, and two of them are under $100 
each. She did not take reasonable and responsible actions to resolve her SOR debts. 
There are not clear indications the problem is being resolved and is under control. She 
did not receive financial counseling or establish that she was unable to make some 
payments to some of her SOR creditors. Her efforts are insufficient to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting Applicant’s continued access to classified 
information; however, this evidence is not sufficient to mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant is a 27-year-old apprentice, who has worked at a construction facility since 
February 2014. In 2009, she received her bachelor’s degree. She served in the National 
Guard since October 2009. She was unemployed from February 2013 to September 
2013. There is no evidence that Applicant has committed any security violations.  Her 
finances were harmed by unemployment, medical problems, and an accident in 2008. 
These are circumstances beyond her control that contributed to her financial problems. 
 
The factors weighing towards reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance are 
less substantial than the factors weighing against its reinstatement. On her March 21, 
2014 SF 86, Applicant disclosed 11 debts, and 10 of those debts were listed on her 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR. She said she was making $75 monthly payments to address each of the two 
judgments for $11,417 and $1,962 resulting from an accident in 2008. She did not 
provide proof of her payments, and Department Counsel in the FORM warned her of the 
importance of providing such information; however, no such evidence was provided.  
There is insufficient documented progress to establish there are clear indications the 
problem is being resolved and her finances are under control. She did not receive 
financial counseling or establish that she was unable to make some payments to more 
of her SOR creditors. She did not act responsibly under the circumstances, and her 
financial problems are likely to continue. She did not provide documentation showing 
she disputed any of her SOR debts. The record does not show enough evidence of 
inability to pay debts, documented financial progress, financial effort, good judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability to warrant mitigation of financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude 
that reinstatement of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This 
decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not 
attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in the 
future. With more effort towards resolving her past-due debts, and a track record of 
behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of her worthiness for a security clearance.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not carried 
her burden and financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion  
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
