 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-03577   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to file federal and state income tax returns, and 
accumulating delinquent debts and unpaid taxes since 2005. He failed to provide 
evidence that he paid or resolved any of the allegations raised by the Government. 
Financial security concerns were not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On March 19, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On October 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 23, 2014, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On December 22, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items was 
provided to Applicant on December 30, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on January 9, 2015, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). He provided no additional information in response to the FORM 
within the 30-day period. DOHA assigned the case to me on March 16, 2015. 
 
Rulings on Evidence 
 
Item 5 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of 
Applicant. The nine-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant 
conducted on May 7, 2013. An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when 
it is authenticated by a witness.1 Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has 
not raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua sponte. While it is clear that 
Department Counsel is acting in good faith, having highlighted the issue in the FORM,2 
Item 5 is not authenticated. Applicant’s failure to raise this issue in a reply to the FORM 
is not a knowing waiver of the rule.3 Accordingly, Item 5 is not admissible and is not 
considered in this Decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted all SOR allegations. (Item 2.) His admissions 
are accepted as factual findings.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and divorced since December 2003. He and his former 
wife have three children, ages 20, 23 and 18. In June 2011 he began a position with a 
defense contractor. Prior to obtaining this position, he had been unemployed since July 
2010, although he worked part-time occasionally and received unemployment benefits.  
Before that time period, he was employed full-time in the private sector from April 2008 
to July 2010. (Item 4.) 
                                                 
1Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal 
Board restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
 
2 Department Counsel Brief at 2. 
 
3Wavier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right 
and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his SOR response, Applicant attributed his financial problems to a contentious 
divorce and subsequent custody battle, a long period of unemployment, and the 
economic downward spiral in 2007. After moving out of the family residence in August 
2003, he lived in his truck for a period of time before he could afford an apartment. He 
noted that his three children live with him. He said he could not file taxes because his 
ex-wife refused to give him the necessary documents. He stated that he recently 
contacted a lawyer regarding filing his tax returns. (Item 3.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports dated April 2013 and May 2014, the SOR alleged 
the following: (a) Applicant owed the federal government $24,378 for an unpaid tax lien 
filed in 2011; (b) Applicant failed to file or pay federal and state income tax returns for 
tax years 2005 through 2012; and (c) Applicant owed $427 to a retail store for a 
delinquent debt. Applicant did not provide documentary proof that he has addressed or 
resolved any of these allegations. 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence that he obtained credit counseling. He did not 
submit a budget or a plan to pay the outstanding tax lien or retail debt. He offered no 
timeline for filing his delinquent tax returns. He submitted no evidence concerning the 
quality of his professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his 
track record with respect to handling classified information and observation of security 
procedures. He provided no character references describing his judgment, 
trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(g) failure to file annual federal, state or local income tax returns as 
required. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems, including tax issues, began accumulating in 2005. 
Since then he has been unable or unwilling to satisfy or resolve them. The evidence 
raises the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts and unfiled tax returns continue to be unresolved. 
Because he failed to provide proof that he has paid, resolved, or is paying the debts and 
filing the returns, he did not demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue or 
recur. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing his taxes and debts remain a 
concern. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose as a result of 
a divorce in 2003, subsequent custody issues, and unemployment from July 2010 to 
June 2011. Those were circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances; or that he 
attempted to resolve the debts or tax problems while they were accumulating. AG ¶ 
20(b) has limited application.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, and there are no 
clear indications that his delinquent debts or tax problems are under control; thus, AG ¶ 
20(c) has no application. He did not provide sufficient documentation to demonstrate 
that he made a good-faith effort to resolve the tax lien, to file delinquent returns, or to 
pay the small retail debt alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant 
admitted the three allegations listed in the SOR; thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 53 years old. He 
has been employed by a defense contractor since June 2011. Prior to obtaining this 
position he was unemployed for almost a year, during which time he occasionally found 
part-time work and received unemployment benefits. Subsequent to his divorce in 2003, 
he failed to file federal or state income tax returns, or pay taxes for the years 2005 to 
2012. In March 2011 the federal government notified him of a $24,000 tax lien. To date 
he has not established a plan to pay the lien, nor has he filed any of the seven years of 
unfiled returns. On October 1, 2014, the SOR notified Applicant of the Government’s 
security concerns related to his taxes. On October 23, 2014, he responded to the SOR, 
but provided no documentation pertinent to the allegations. In December 2014 the 
Government filed its FORM again notifying Applicant of his failure to provide evidence of 
resolution of the taxes or debts. He then had 30 days to submit additional information, 
but failed to do so. Applicant has been on notice for four months that his tax problems 
and delinquent debts were raising security concerns that could affect his security 
clearance and employment. Despite that notice he failed to document any steps that he 
had taken to address the security concerns. The likelihood that similar problems will 
continue is significant.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
