 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00467 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by her history of not meeting 
financial obligations. Her delinquent debts total over $75,000. She did not submit 
evidence showing that she has addressed her debts or to substantiate her dispute of 
the debts. She failed to establish that her financial situation is under control. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline (Guideline F).1 On May 19, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR, affirmatively waived her right to a hearing, and requested 
a decision regarding her suitability for a clearance on the written record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On November 20, 2014, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed 
findings of fact, argument, and seven exhibits. Applicant did not submit a response to 
the FORM within the allotted 30-day period.  
 
 On February 5, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case and sua sponte opened 
the record to provide her a final opportunity to submit a response to the FORM and 
provide any additional matters in support of her case.2 On March 20, 2015, Applicant 
timely submitted a Response and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. Government 
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 7 and Ax. A are admitted into evidence without objection.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact:4 
 
 Applicant is in her forties and married, with three children ranging in ages from 4 
to 20. She recently gave birth to a child that died. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2004 and a master’s degree in 2006. She is employed as an engineer, and has been 
with her current employer since January 2013. Over the past seven years, she has 
been consistently employed, except for eight months in 2008 when she took time off 
from work for the birth of her youngest living child.  
 
 In October 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
She reported several delinquent debts. Most of the listed debts were for student loans, 
but Applicant also listed a considerable debt for a car that was repossessed in 2008. 
Applicant indicated that she had either entered repayment plans to satisfy her 
delinquent debts or was in the process of contacting her overdue creditors to negotiate 
a debt repayment plan. (Gx. 5 at 35-39) 
 
 A credit report from November 2013 reflects that Applicant had numerous 
derogatory accounts, to include four delinquent student loans that were being paid by 
garnishment. In December 2013, Applicant was interviewed as part of her security 
clearance background investigation. She was asked about the derogatory accounts 
reflected on her credit report. Applicant indicated that her financial problems were due 
to past immaturity in handling her finances and an overwhelming amount of student loan 
debt. She further indicated that she had consolidated her student loans and was 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I. Initially, I set a deadline of February 20, 2015, but granted Applicant’s 
request for additional time to submit matters. 
 
3 Gx. 5 is a summary of Applicant’s security clearance background interview from December 12, 2013. 
Department Counsel concedes that the information contained in the summary “may not be entirely 
correct, or up to date.” (FORM, n. 1) Accordingly, I have given this document less weight. 
 
4 In reaching the above findings of fact, I have made only those reasonable inferences supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence. 
 
3 
 
 
repaying them. She told the investigator that she had no credit cards and was paying 
her current expenses on a consistent basis.   
 
 The SOR lists 17 delinquent debts totaling approximately $80,000. All 17 debts 
are reflected on the 2013 credit report. (Gx. 6) These debts, except for four minor debts 
(1.f, 1.g, 1.o, and 1.q), totaling about $2,500, are also listed on a recent credit report. 
The recent credit report also reflects that four of Applicant’s student loans are still being 
paid by wage garnishment and the creditor for several other student loan accounts has 
filed claims with the Government.5 (Gx. 7)  
 
 Applicant has filed disputes challenging a number of the derogatory accounts 
listed on her credit report. (Gx. 7) She is working with a credit repair agency to correct 
what she claims is inaccurate derogatory information that is being reported by the credit 
bureaus. She did not submit documentary evidence to substantiate the basis of her 
dispute or efforts to resolve the SOR debts.6 She also did not submit information 
regarding her current income, expenses, or other evidence regarding her current 
finances, except that her credit score has improved in the past fifteen months from the 
low 500s to the mid/high 500s. (Ax. A) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
                                                          
5 Applicant’s student loan accounts are not listed on the SOR and, thus, are only being considered in 
assessing her mitigation case and whole-person factors.  
 
6 The recent credit reflects that Applicant is paying the two mortgages on her home and one of her 
student loan accounts. (Gx. 7) It is unclear whether this student loan account in good standing reflects all 
of Applicant’s outstanding student loans. Applicant was informed that she bore the burden of providing 
documentation to substantiate a claim of debt repayment or dispute of a debt. (FORM Response at 3) 
She elected not to submit such documentation as to her student loans and the debts listed on the SOR.  
 
4 
 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises . . . there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”). However, there is no per se rule requiring 
disqualification, as a judge must decide each case based on its own merits.7 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding an individual with financial problems is explained 
at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of a substantial amount of 
delinquent debt raises this concern. The evidence also establishes the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
5 
 
 
An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”8 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under the guideline. The relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Even after crediting Applicant with 
resolving the four minor debts that no longer appear on her credit report, she failed to 
submit evidence to substantiate the basis of her dispute or to document her efforts to 
address her delinquent debts. She also did not submit evidence of financial counseling 
or how she currently manages her finances. Individuals are expected to submit 
documentation or other substantial evidence regarding their efforts to resolve SOR 
debts or to substantiate their dispute of a debt, as well as evidence of financial reform 
and rehabilitation.9 Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion and production. 
Notwithstanding full-time employment since 2009, the record evidence reflects that 
Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts total over $75,000. Her debts are numerous, 
substantial, and continue to raise a concern about her suitability for a clearance.10  
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).  
 
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 12-11660 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 9, 2014) (“In light of the absence of corroboration of 
Applicant’s statements that he had paid his debts, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s 
financial problems were still ongoing.”). 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I have considered those factors, as well as all available 
information, in determining Applicant’s eligibility.  
 
 In October 2013, Applicant filled out an SCA that asked her several questions 
about her financial record, to include whether she had delinquent debt. In December 
2013, she sat down for a security clearance background interview and was questioned 
about the numerous derogatory accounts reflected on her credit report. These inquiries 
should have placed Applicant on clear notice regarding the Government’s concerns 
regarding her finances. Applicant stated in the SCA and during her background 
interview that she was taking steps to resolve her delinquent debts. Seventeen months 
after submitting the SCA, Applicant still has not provided documentation to corroborate 
her claim of debt repayment or to substantiate her dispute of the debts at issue. 
Although the recent loss of her newborn child is a tragic incident that may have 
impacted or exacerbated her financial situation, her financial problems predate this 
recent tragedy. Applicant’s history of failing to meet her financial obligations, coupled 
with the lack of evidence regarding her efforts to address her debts and status of her 
current finances, raise doubts about her present financial situation. Such doubts must 
be resolved in favor of national security.11  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e, 1.h – 1.n, and 1.p:      Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, 1.o, and 1.q:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“The Directive requires a Judge to resolve any 
doubt in favor of national security.”) (citing, Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b)). 
