 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03456 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 9, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 19, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 12, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant’s counsel objected to GE 2, an 
official document from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.1 The objection was 
overruled, and it was admitted. There were no other objections and the remaining 
documents were admitted into evidence. Applicant and four witnesses testified on his 
behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through X, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 20, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.d. He admitted the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He attended college and earned 128 credits, but did 
not complete a degree. He served in the Navy for eight years and was honorably 
discharged. He was married from 1979 to 1989 and from 1993 to 2003. He has three 
grown children. He worked for a federal contractor from 1970 to 1994 when he left to go 
into business with his brother. He returned to working for a federal contractor in 2002 
where he continues to work.2  
 
In 1982, Applicant was convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol. 
He paid a fine and completed a driving class. In 2011, Applicant was attending his son’s 
wedding. It was the first wedding in his family, and they had all gathered to celebrate. 
During the reception, friends of his son started to buy Applicant alcoholic drinks. He 
admitted he made a mistake when he chose to drive back to where he was staying. He 
was stopped by the police at a checkpoint and charged with DUI. He obtained an 
attorney and was eventually notified that he was found not guilty of the DUI charge. He 
provided supporting documents.3 Applicant admitted his blood alcohol content (BAC) 
was over .15%. His license was suspended in the state where the offense occurred for 
30 days. He was unaware of any requirements he had to complete regarding the 
suspension. He did not believe the suspension impacted his driver’s license in the state 
where he lived. When he went to renew his driver’s license he learned there was an 
issue due to the other state’s suspension. He was made aware that he was required to 
complete an alcohol awareness program before the hold on his license would be 
removed from his record, and he would be able to renew it.4  
 
Applicant completed a 16-hour alcohol awareness class as part of the state’s 
suspension of his license. As part of the awareness program he was required to attend 
                                                          
1 The FBI report shows Applicant was convicted of DUI. There is evidence to the contrary in the record.  
 
2 Tr. 19-27, 88-90. 
 
3 AE W, Z. The documents state that the disposition of the charge was not guilty. Considering Applicant 
never appeared in court, it is more likely the charge was dismissed. 
 
4 Tr. 28, 30-43, 47-48, 50-57. 
 
3 
 
 
an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meeting to learn more about the addiction, which he did. 
Applicant disputes he was ever diagnosed as alcohol dependent and ordered to attend 
AA on a recurring basis or as a part of a treatment program. Applicant asked the person 
from the alcohol awareness program who made an assessment about his alcohol use if 
he had any issues, and he was told no. The only information in the record to support 
Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent is a report of investigation summary. 
There is no independent evidence from the treatment facility or information as to who 
made a diagnosis. Applicant attended the alcohol awareness program as part of the 
requirement to remove the hold on his license. I find there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He completed the 
requirements to have the restrictions removed on his license, and he successfully 
renewed it.5  
 
Applicant credibly testified he was never told by anyone to abstain from alcohol 
consumption. Applicant intends to continue to drink alcohol responsibly. He does not 
drink to intoxication. He only drinks socially. He lives alone, but does not drink at home 
alone.6  
 
Four character witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. None of them were 
concerned that Applicant abused alcohol. He is considered very competent in his job. 
Several have traveled with him for work and socialized while on travel and never 
observed him exhibiting any questionable conduct when consuming alcohol. They 
testified that he has stellar judgment and is considered reliable and trustworthy. He is 
considered very honest. Documents were provided reflecting Applicant’s outstanding 
work performance and achievements.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
5 Tr. 27-31, 35, 43-47, 57-61; AE W, X, Z.  
 
6 Tr. 32, 35-37, 47-49, 62-63. 
 
7 Tr. 65-88; AE A-V. 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 and the 
following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
 
5 
 
 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
  Applicant was convicted of DUI in 1982 and charged with DUI in 2011. The 
above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
  
Applicant had two alcohol-related incidents in the past 29 years. He was 
convicted of DUI in 1982 and was charged with DUI in 2011. He was not convicted in 
the later incident, but acknowledges he was intoxicated when he was stopped by the 
police after attending his son’s wedding. He was unaware that despite the dismissal of 
the charge he was still required to attend an alcohol awareness class. When he learned 
of the requirement, he completed the 16-hour class. His conduct after his son’s wedding 
was an aberration from his normal conduct. Applicant continues to consume alcohol, but 
there is considerable evidence that he does so responsibly. He is remorseful for his lack 
of judgment for consuming too much alcohol after his son’s wedding and his DUI 
conviction from 1982. I find that his alcohol-related behavior was infrequent and the 
latest DUI issue happened under unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do 
not cast doubt on his current reliably, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) 
and 23(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He served honorably in the military. He had a DUI 
conviction in 1982 and was arrested in 2011 for DUI. He was found not guilty of the later 
charge, but acknowledged he was intoxicated. He has completed the alcohol 
awareness class required to renew his license. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under the alcohol consumption guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
