 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01828 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on November 28, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on December 15, 2014. As of March 9, 2015, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on March 11, 2015. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 3-12) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor company since 1988. He served in the U.S. Air 
Force from 1978 to 1984 and the Air Force Reserve from 1984 to 1988. He was 
honorably discharged from each. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since at least 1989. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married, but separated 
pending a divorce. He has two adult children.1   
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling about $49,000. Applicant 
admitted owing three debts, but he indicated that his estranged wife was supposed to 
pay two of the debts. He stated that he was uncertain about the third debt, and he is 
paying the fourth debt. Each debt is listed on at least one credit report.2   
 
 Applicant stated that in March 2010, his family was notified that they had five 
days to vacate their home because it was being short sold. He indicated that he and his 
wife separated at about the same time, and that they had an oral agreement to split 
their bills. He stated that his wife was supposed to pay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
($28,800) and 1.c ($7,413). The credit reports list the $28,800 debt as an individual 
account with a date of last activity of August 2009. The $7,413 debt is reported as a 
joint account with a date of last activity of July 2010.3   
 
 Applicant stated that he was uncertain about the $1,642 debt (SOR ¶ 1.b) to a 
collection company on behalf of a bank. He stated that he was “working with the bank to 
clear this out.” The credit reports list the debt as an individual account with a date of last 
activity of June 2010.4     
 
 Applicant had a mortgage loan and a home equity loan through the same bank. 
The credit reports list the mortgage loan as opened in April 2001 with a date of last 
activity of October 2009. The loan is listed as in foreclosure with a past-due amount of 
$11,306, but a zero balance. This is the debt that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant has 
been paying the home equity loan. The home equity loan is listed as current, with 
balances of $13,360 on Applicant’s February 2014 credit report; $11,781 on his June 
2014 credit report; and $10,978 on his August 2014 credit report. The home equity loan 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 7-12.  
 
2 Items 3, 6, 7.  
 
3 Items 3, 6, 7.  
 
4 Items 3, 6, 7.  
 
 
3 
 
is not alleged in the SOR. Applicant confused the home equity loan with the first 
mortgage loan when he stated that he was paying the debt.5     
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the SOR that he and his wife were “in the 
process of working with a credit agency” to try and get their credit back. He did not 
respond to the FORM, so no additional information was provided. 
 
Applicant submitted numerous security clearance applications over the last 34 
years. He submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in January 
2014. He answered “No” to all the financial questions under Section 26, including the 
following: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had any possessions or property 
voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan? (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor).  
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).6    
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he did not have 
a copy of his credit report when he prepared the SF 86: 
 
I admit I didn’t do a good job of collecting all the information needed for my 
application. I plan on retiring in 2017 and figure this will be my last update. 
I rushed through the application process.7   
 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 6, 7.  
 
6 Item 4.  
 
7 Item 3.  
 
 
4 
 
 It is possible that Applicant’s wife did not pay debts after they separated. 
However, one account became delinquent in 2009, before they separated. The 
mortgage loan was in foreclosure at one point. It is unclear if the loan was foreclosed or 
resolved through a short sale. In any event, Applicant clearly knew that the mortgage 
loan was delinquent. Having considered all the evidence, I find that Applicant 
intentionally provided false information about his finances on his 2014 SF 86.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant has a deficiency balance of $11,306 on his first 
mortgage loan. The evidence does not support that allegation. The credit reports list the 
loan as in foreclosure with a past-due amount of $11,306, but a zero balance. A past-
due amount does not equate to a deficiency. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant is separated, pending a divorce, which qualifies as a condition that was 
beyond his control. However, his financial problems appear to predate his separation. 
To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under 
the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant’s home went into foreclosure. It is unclear if the first mortgage loan was 
foreclosed or resolved through a short sale. Applicant has continued to pay the home 
equity loan, which shows a degree of good faith. However, he has three large 
unresolved debts. He stated that his wife was supposed to pay two of the debts, but the 
largest debt became delinquent before they separated. He provided no additional 
information about how he is addressing his financial problems.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay all his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is only applicable to the home 
equity loan, which was not alleged. I find that financial considerations concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
7 
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about his finances on his SF 86. 
AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 There is no evidence that Applicant corrected his false SF 86 before being 
confronted with the facts. His lack of candor is recent, and it casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no applicable mitigating 
conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his long and stable work 
record. However, his financial affairs are not in order, and he falsified his SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
