KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge considered non-alleged conduct in its proper context.  Applicant was not
denied notice of the security concerns against him, nor was he otherwise denied due process. 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record.  The Appeal Board has no authority to make findings of fact.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASE NO: 14-01941.a1
DATE: 03/30/2015
DATE:  March 30, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01941
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William S. Aramony, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
13, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On December 9, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge raised concerns beyond
the scope of the SOR; whether Applicant was denied due process; and whether the Judge’s adverse
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is President and CEO of a Government contractor.  He has held a security
clearance in the past.  Applicant failed timely to file and pay his Federal and state income taxes for
2011 and 2012.  In addition, in his response to the File of Relevant Material, he stated that he had
not paid his 2010 Federal taxes until 2013.  The reason for his tax delinquencies was the recession
of 2008, which caused a business decline.  He also asserted that his late filings were due to the
resignation of his operations manager, who did not leave behind sufficient information necessary
for the tax filings.  Applicant paid his 2012 Federal taxes in April 2014, a year after they were due.
He paid his 2011 taxes two years after they were due.  He paid his state taxes for both years in June
2014.  Applicant paid his state taxes six days after the issuance of the SOR, which he termed
coincidental.  In addition, in April 2014, he filed a request for a six month extension for his 2013
Federal taxes.  He did not provide information regarding whether he filed or paid his taxes for that
year.  He submitted no character references or evidence that his current financial situation is such
that he can meet his tax obligations.  Applicant resolved two debts alleged in the SOR that were not
related to his tax problems.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s failure to make timely tax filings and payments raised
security concerns.  She noted evidence that Applicant’s problems were affected by circumstances
outside his control, such as the 2008 economic downturn and the resignation of his operations
manager.  However, she concluded that he had not demonstrated responsible action to a degree
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns.  She stated that he had not provided evidence of any tax
payments until well after they were due or that he had contacted the appropriate tax authorities as
soon as he knew he would not file on time.  She stated that Applicant had not had any financial
counseling and presented no evidence that he had attempted to resolve his tax debts during the time
between the dates they were due and the dates they were actually paid.  
In the whole-person analysis the Judge noted Applicant’s evidence concerning his company’s
financial difficulties and that he had paid his 2011 and 2012 taxes by the close of the record.
However, she also cited to evidence that Applicant had a three year history of late filings and
payments and that he had paid his state taxes after the receipt of the SOR.  She stated that
Applicant’s failure to disclose information about his 2010 taxes in his clearance application impaired
his credibility.  She also noted that Applicant had provided no evidence that he had filed his 2013
tax returns.  She stated that Applicant’s “actions raise a substantive concern that there is a likelihood
that similar problems relating to his legal obligation to timely pay taxes will continue.”  Decision
at 8.  Accordingly, the Judge concluded that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion.
3
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge raised concerns that were beyond the scope of the SOR
and improperly resolved them against him.  He cites to the Judge’s reference to his 2010 and 2013
taxes despite neither being alleged in the SOR.  He also cites to other statements by the Judge, for
example that he had used funds for ordinary expenses that could have been used for tax payments,
in support of his argument.  He contends that had the Judge or Department Counsel sought to amend
the SOR to include these allegations that Applicant could have addressed and resolved them.  As
it stands, he argues, Applicant was denied notice of these matters, impairing his effort to present a
case in mitigation.
While it is true that the evidence Applicant has cited was not alleged in the SOR, a Judge can
consider non-alleged conduct or circumstances for a number of reasons: assessing an applicant’s
credibility, evaluating his case for mitigation, and performing a whole-person analysis.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 12-01038 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 26, 2013).  In this case, we find no reason to conclude
that the Judge considered the evidence in question in an improper manner.  She cited to Applicant’s
failure to divulge his 2010 tax issue as part of her credibility determination.  In commenting on
Applicant’s credibility, the Judge was not raising additional concerns that should have been analyzed
under Guideline E, as Applicant contends.  Indeed, the making of credibility determinations is part
of a Judge’s job, and we give deference to those determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Moreover,
it was reasonable for the Judge to consider the 2010 and 2013 tax problems in evaluating the extent
to which Applicant has placed his security significant conduct behind him.  The Judge evaluated the
non-alleged conduct in its proper context.  We resolve this assignment of error adversely to
Applicant. 
Concerning due process, none of the evidence that Applicant has cited was beyond the
reasonable scope of the SOR, insofar as all of it related to the tax delinquencies that were the basis
for the security concerns raised.  An SOR is as administrative pleading that is not held to the
requirements of a criminal indictment.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06859 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2010).  An SOR should give an applicant reasonable notice of the concerns raised in his case, but
it cannot be expected to cite to every piece of evidence that might be relevant in evaluating those
concerns.  Insofar as Applicant’s SOR placed him on notice that his 2011 and 2012 tax
delinquencies raised questions about his judgment and self-control, it was foreseeable that the Judge
would consider other similar conduct in evaluating his case for mitigation.  In any event, evidence
about the 2010 and 2013 tax filings came from Applicant himself in his response to the File of
Relevant Material, vitiating his argument of unfair surprise.  Applicant was not denied an
opportunity to prepare his case for mitigation, nor were the due process rights afforded him by the
Directive otherwise impaired.  
Applicant cites to favorable evidence that he contends the Judge failed to consider, for
example that he is meeting his ordinary expenses, has hired a different accountant, and has paid off
several debts before the issuance of the SOR.  He argues that this failure impaired the Judge’s
whole-person analysis.  This argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record, nor does it demonstrate that the Judge mis-weighed the
1Applicant requests that we make “specific findings on the favorable evidence.”  Appeal Brief at 14.  The
Appeal Board has no authority to make findings of fact.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-21242 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 20,
2004).  We note Applicant’s reiteration that the SOR raised only Guideline F concerns and none under Guideline E.  
4
evidence, viewed as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00898 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2011).
The Judge’s whole-person analysis satisfied the requirements of the Directive in that it considered
Applicant’s security-significant circumstances in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 12-03077 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 13, 2013). Given Applicant’s tax delinquencies and a
paucity of evidence concerning what actions he took to resolve them as soon as they arose and the
extent to which Applicant currently has the means to satisfy his tax requirements, the Judge’s
adverse decision is sustainable.1  
  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
