 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03068 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nichole A. Smith, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 3, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
8, 2015, scheduling the hearing for January 21, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2015.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant submitted written requests that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about India and Malaysia. The requests were not 
admitted in evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through 
IV. Neither side objected, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained 
in HE I through IV. The facts are summarized in the written requests and will not be 
repeated in the Findings of Fact. Reference to some of the facts contained in HE I 
through IV will be made in the Analysis section.  
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were 
admitted without objection.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2011. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He is married with two minor children.2 
  
 Applicant was born in India to Indian parents. He attended college in India. He 
came to the United States in 1997 to attend graduate school. He received a master’s 
degree from a U.S. university in 1999. He remained in the United States, and he 
became a U.S. citizen in 2010. India does not permit dual citizenship. Applicant 
surrendered his Indian passport to the Indian Consulate in 2010.3 
 
 Applicant met his wife in Singapore. She was a citizen of Malaysia. They married 
in 2003. She became a U.S. citizen in 2013. Their children were born in the United 
States.4 
 
 Applicant’s parents and brother are citizens and residents of India. His father is in 
his late 60s, and his mother is in her late 50s. His father is a teacher. His mother does 
not work outside the home. His brother is a doctor. Applicant’s family members are not 
affiliated with the Indian government.5 
                                                          
1 AE J was attached to Applicant’s response to the SOR. 
 
2 Tr. at 22-26, 56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 22, 61-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 56-57; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 26, 29-30, 32, 64-65, 76; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE J. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s mother visited him in the United States on three occasions. His father 
and brother have never visited the United States. Applicant talks to his parents on the 
telephone about once a week. He talks to his brother about once a month.6 
  
 Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. He was a teacher before he passed away. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Malaysia. She does not work 
outside the home. Applicant’s wife talks to her mother about once a week, but Applicant 
has only limited contact with her.7 
 
 Applicant’s wife has two sisters and a brother. One sister is a citizen of Malaysia 
and a resident of India. To Applicant’s knowledge she is not employed. A second sister-
in-law and Applicant’s brother-in-law are citizens and residents of Malaysia. The second 
sister-in-law does not work outside the home. Applicant’s wife talks to her sisters on a 
regular basis, but Applicant has only limited contact with them. Applicant’s brother-in-
law works in the information technology field. Applicant’s wife is estranged from her 
brother, and they have had no contact with him in about five years. To the best of 
Applicant’s knowledge, none of his in-laws have any direct connection to the Malaysian 
government.8 
  
 Applicant purchased a parcel of land in India in 2013 as an investment property. 
He paid the equivalent of about $12,500 for the property. He sold the property in 
January 2015 for about the same amount.9 
 
 Applicant and his wife regularly travel to India and Malaysia to visit their family. 
He has a bank account in India that he uses when he visits. He will place some money 
in the account before the visit. He currently has the equivalent of about $200 in the 
account. His wife has a bank account in Malaysia for the same purpose. She has the 
equivalent of about $1,000 in the account.10 
 
 Applicant and his wife own a house in the United States valued at about 
$400,000, with approximately $85,000 in equity. He has about $151,000 in a money 
market account and about $117,000 in retirement accounts. He stated that his wife and 
children are in the United States, and that is where his allegiance lies. He stated that he 
would report any attempt to use his family in India and Malaysia against him.11  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 26-27, 30, 33, 64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 38-39, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 34-42, 57, 67-68; Applicant’s response to SOR;  GE 1, 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 42-47, 68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
10 Tr. at 47-55, 67-68; GE 1, 2; AE F. 
 
11 Tr. at 58-61, 70-71; AE A-D. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his excellent job performance, 
honesty, dedication, trustworthiness, professionalism, integrity, and loyalty to the United 
States.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
                                                          
12 AE G-I. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s parents and brother are citizens and residents of India. India is the 
world’s largest democracy, works closely with the United States on many matters, 
shares common strategic interests, and generally respects the rights of its citizens. But 
it also continues to have human rights problems; it has been victimized by terrorist 
attacks; and restricted, dual-use technology has been illegally exported to India.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Malaysia. His sister-in-law is 
a Malaysian citizen residing in India. Malaysia is a constitutional monarchy with a prime 
 
6 
 
minister. The United States is the largest foreign investor in Malaysia. Malaysia 
generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are human rights problems in some 
areas, and there is a threat of terrorist activity.  
 
 Applicant’s relatives in India and Malaysia create a potential conflict of interest 
and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised 
by the evidence.  
 
  Applicant no longer owns land in India. AG ¶ 7(e) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.f is 
concluded for Applicant.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India and Malaysia. Guideline 
B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a 
compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any 
person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.13  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
7 
 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant has been in this country for more than 17 years, and he has been a 
U.S. citizen since 2010. His wife became a U.S. citizen in 2013, and their children are 
U.S. citizens who were born in the United States. Applicant has a successful career. He 
and his wife have a substantial amount of U.S. assets. While he and his wife still have 
family in India and Malaysia that they care for, their life and future are in the United 
States.  
 
 India is a democracy and a strategic partner of the United States. Technology 
has been illegally exported to India, but the documents provided for administrative 
notice do not show that coercion was utilized. I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United States and 
the interests of the Indian or the Malaysian governments. I further find there is no 
conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. He has foreign family 
members, but his wife and children are in the United States. His foreign connections do 
not create an unacceptable security risk.  
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
