 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01675 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on October 7, 2014. The FORM was mailed to Applicant who 
 
2 
 
 
received it on November 13, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit any 
further information. The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c and 1.f – 1.h. 
He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. Department Counsel conceded SOR ¶ 1.h is a 
duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.d, therefore, I find in favor of Applicant concerning SOR ¶ 1.h. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He is married and has an adult stepdaughter. He has 
worked for his current employer since April 2013. He is seeking a position with a 
defense contractor. He possesses a high school diploma. He has no military service. He 
had a period of unemployment from May 2012 to April 2013.1  
  
 The SOR lists a federal tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a) and six delinquent debts (excepting 
SOR debt ¶ 1.h) totaling $71,807. The debts include a past-due home mortgage (SOR ¶ 
1.b); a deficiency from a foreclosure on a time-share property (SOR ¶ 1.c); and four 
credit card or consumer debts (SOR ¶ 1.d - ¶ 1.g). These debts are supported by credit 
reports from October 2014 and December 2013. Applicant claims he made a payment 
to the IRS in September of 2013 in the amount of $12,000 and that his 2012 and 2013 
federal tax refunds totaling $10,000 were withheld and applied against the IRS tax lien 
reducing the amount of the lien to $12,000. He failed to supply documentation 
supporting these transactions.2 
 
 He also claims he is paying his home mortgage debt and has applied for a loan 
modification. He failed to supply documentation supporting either assertion. He claims 
he signed over the deed for the timeshare, which is supported by a notation on the 
December 2013 credit report. There is no evidence of payment toward any deficiency.3   
 
 Applicant claims he had no knowledge of the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.e, 
that he paid the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.f in June 2013 (the December 2013 credit report 
shows the debt as still unpaid), and that he was resolving the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
He did not provide any documentation disputing the debts, nor proof of payments, or 
payment plans. These debts are unresolved.4  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 1, 2, 4-5. 
 
3 Items 2, 5. 
 
4 Items 2, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not specify what caused his financial problems; however, he was 
unemployed for about a year from May 2012 to April 2013. The tax lien apparently 
arose due his failure to pay the proper federal taxes related to a business he and his 
wife owned. He did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Item 2, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a tax lien and delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I 
find both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant provided evidence that he experienced a period of unemployment, which 
contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for this mitigating condition to 
fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the 
circumstances. He presented no such evidence of responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling and there 
is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under 
control because the debts remain unpaid. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. He 
failed to supply documentary evidence to show that he paid part of the tax lien amount 
or that he paid any other debts. He also failed to document his dispute of SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.e. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I also considered Applicant’s 
personal situation. However, he has not shown a track record of financial stability.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
