 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02070  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Although Applicant’s financial problems were caused 
by events beyond his control that occurred between 2011 and 2014, he has not taken 
any steps to resolve his $42,000 in outstanding delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. The 
Government submitted its written case on October 29, 2014. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on November 17, 2014. He did not respond. The case was assigned to me 
on February 3, 2015. I admitted the items attached to the FORM as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1-7 without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 52, is an employee of a federal contractor. On his January 2014 
security clearance application, Applicant disclosed derogatory financial information. The 
ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant is indebted to five creditors2 for 
approximately $42,000.3 
 
 Applicant claims that he incurred the delinquent debt during two periods of 
unemployment between March 2011 and January 2014, lasting 16 months and 9 
months, respectively. He also blames the dissolution of his 27-year marriage in 
December 2011. Applicant remarried in December 2013. Although Applicant admits 
owing each debt, he has not taken any steps to resolve any of his delinquent accounts.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
                                                          
2 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a $2,606 collection account. Although 
Applicant admits to owing the debt, there is nothing in the record to suggest a good-faith basis for the 
allegation. Applicant did not disclose the debt on his security clearance application nor does the debt 
appear on either of the two credit reports in the record (GE 5-6). Accordingly, I find in Applicant’s favor on 
this allegation. 
 
3 GE 5-6.  
 
4 GE 3-4.  
 
3 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”5 The Government does not have to prove that an applicant poses a clear 
and present danger to national security,6 or that an applicant poses an imminent threat 
of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show that an applicant has a 
history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him more vulnerable to 
financial pressures.7 
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he owes approximately $42,000 in 
delinquent debt. Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a 
history of not doing so.8 Although Applicant’s financial problems may have been caused 
by a significant period of unemployment and the dissolution of his first marriage, he has 
not provided any evidence to show that he has acted responsibly in light of his 
circumstances, that he is making a good-faith effort to address his delinquent debt, or 
that his finances are otherwise under control. Accordingly, none of the financial 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. In requesting 
an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In doing 
so, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to supplement the 
record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, articulate his 
position, mitigate the financial concerns, or establish evidence of financial rehabilitation. 
                                                          
5  AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989). 
  
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
 
4 
 
The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. Following Egan9 and the clearly-
consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
