1
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01518
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 18, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on April 28, 2011. (Item 5.) On September 25, 2014, the Department of
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline H (Drug Involvement). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) in writing on October 30, 2014, and
requested a decision by an administrative judge without a hearing. (Item 3.) Department
Counsel submitted the Government’s written File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
Applicant on December 15, 2014. The FORM contained seven Items. Applicant
acknowledged receipt of the FORM on January 2, 2015. She was given 30 days from
receipt of the FORM to submit  additional documentation. Applicant elected not to
submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2015.
1 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board
restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
2 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n. 1. 
3 Wavier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and
the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009).
2
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Rulings on Evidence
Item 6 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of
Applicant. The five-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant the
Government conducted on December 31, 2013. An ROI may be received and
considered as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness.1 Although Applicant, who
is representing herself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua
sponte. While it is clear that Department Counsel is acting in good faith, having
highlighted the issue in the FORM,2  Exhibit 6 is not authenticated. Applicant’s failure to
reply to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.3 Accordingly, Item 6 is not
admissible and is not considered in this Decision.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 31 and single. She has no children. She possesses a bachelor’s
degree and is enrolled in a master’s program. She enlisted in the Air Force in 2001 and
served on active duty until 2007. She had a break in service from February 2007 to July
2008, and then served as a Air Force Reservist from July 2008 through December
2009, including a period of activation from October 2008 to September 2009. She
received an honorable discharge. She was granted a secret security clearance in 2001
in connection with her military service. Applicant has worked for various defense
contractors since her discharge from the Air Force. She submitted an e-QIP on April 28,
2011 (Item 5), and was granted a security clearance in July 2011 (Item 7.)
The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she
used marijuana in May 2013. She subsequently failed a drug test in June 2013,
administered by her employer, and was terminated. This marijuana use occurred after
being granted a security clearance in July 2011. Applicant admitted to the allegations
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, with explanations. She indicated:
In about May 2013, [she] was not employed or in a position to access
classified material. During that time, [she] used an illegal substance. In
June 2013, an unexpected short notice employment opportunity with
[Government Contractor] presented itself and [she] accepted.
Consequently, the lasting effects of marijuana resulted in a ‘failed’
urinalysis and I was unable to deploy to [foreign country] for duty.
3
As a result, I no longer socialize with the same people or within the same
environment. In fact, since then I’ve completed another contract in [foreign
country], graduated with my Bachelor’s degree, enrolled for my [graduate
degree], purchased a second home and am currently studying a second
language. (Item 3.)
Applicant provided two character letters concerning the high quality of her
professional performance, her track record with respect to handling sensitive
information, and observation of security procedures. (Item 3.) I was unable to evaluate
her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case
decided without a hearing. 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
4
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions
under AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) any drug abuse;
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance.
The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). Applicant used marijuana in May 2013
after being granted a security clearance in 2011. Her marijuana use was detected in a
drug test administered by her employer, and her employment was then terminated. The
facts established through the Government’s evidence and through Applicant’s
admissions raise security concerns under all of the above disqualifying conditions.
5
I have reviewed all of the potentially mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26, and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant admitted using marijuana in May 2013. Other than her admission,
Applicant offered little evidence that would support mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a), or
26(b). She was a mature woman at the time of her drug use. She served in the Air
Force since 2001, and was subsequently employed with Federal contractors. She
should have been aware of the Federal laws pertaining to marijuana and the regulations
relating to drug use while possessing a security clearance. Her marijuana use in 2013
continues to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment
because her drug use was relatively recent. Further, she failed to demonstrate an intent
not to abuse any drugs in the future. While she noted that she no longer associates with
drug users, she did not explicitly state that she would forgo illegal substances in the
future. No mitigating conditions have been established.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under Guideline
6
H, above, applies here as well. Applicant served in the Air Force honorably from 2001 to
2009. She is respected by those that wrote letters on her behalf. However, Applicant’s
drug use was recent and occurred after obtaining a security clearance. She failed to
provide sufficient mitigating information to overcome the adverse nature and
seriousness of her conduct.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), her conduct is recent. She failed to demonstrate that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also find
that there is a potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8));
and that there is a likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her drug
involvement. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying her request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
_________________
Jennifer I. Goldstein
Administrative Judge
