 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX. )       ISCR Case No. 14-01884 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 13, 2012, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On June 26, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 21, 2014. Applicant admitted all 
the allegations, including the falsification but denied he did it deliberately. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On December 29, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on January 15, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
January 26, 2015. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on February 25, 2015. I received the case assignment 
on March 16, 2015. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations. He claimed the debts were paid and that he 
did not deliberately falsify his answers to the e-QIP. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, married, and has two children. He works for a defense 
contractor. (Items 3, 4, 7) 
 
 Applicant owed $443 on a cell telephone debt dating from 2013 (Subparagraph 
1.a). As of the date of the SOR the debt was not paid, but Applicant’s Answer states it 
was paid July 7, 2014. The debt does not appear on the October 2014 credit report, but 
does appear on the 2013 and 2012 credit reports. Applicant did not support his 
assertion of payment with any documentary proof of actual payment. This debt is 
unresolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant owed a bank $42,762 on a mortgage account that was 180 days past 
due at the time of the SOR was issued (Subparagraph 1.b). The account is in 
foreclosure and the balance of the mortgage debt is $267,918. Applicant asserts in his 
Answer that on July 7, 2014, the bank told him the house was sold on April 27, 2014, 
and he is no longer indebted to the bank for $42,762. Applicant did not submit any 
documents to verify his claim. He also submitted a letter dated July 18, 2014, stating 
that this property was a rental home and that he “took steps” for the property to be sold 
in a “short sale.” He states further that he “assumed this had been taken care of” and 
that is why he did not think he had any delinquent accounts. He also “understands” he is 
no longer responsible for the account. Applicant submitted a letter from the mortgage 
company dated June 17, 2014. This letter stated the foreclosure started on October 22, 
2010, and the property was sold on June 27, 2013. It provides other information to 
Applicant but does not state he no longer owes any additional money. The October 
2014 credit report shows the debt is in foreclosure. This debt is unresolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant owed $65 on an account in collection to a local organization dating 
from 2010 (Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant contends he paid the debt on July 7, 2014, but 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
does not submit any documents to show it was paid. This debt is on the 2012 credit 
report, but not the 2013 and 2014 credit report. While Applicant claims all his debts 
were paid on July 7, 2014, he does not submit any explanation as to what occurred on 
that date to pay the debts or that he actually paid them, causing them to be removed 
from his credit report. This debt is unresolved and is owed. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant admits he falsified his answer to Section 26 about any financial 
delinquencies on the e-QIP (Subparagraph 2.a). He denies he deliberately did so. 
Section 26 asks if in the past seven years Applicant had any delinquencies or past due 
debts. He knew he failed to keep current his mortgage obligation on the property at 
issue starting in 2010, within the seven year period. He also owed the $65 debt from 
2010. He should have disclosed these debts. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
these two debts on his 2012 e-QIP. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant stated to the government investigator that his wife lost her job and the 
decline in family income did not allow him to pay his debts. However, Applicant did not 
submit any documentation to show when his wife lost her job, what her income was, 
how that loss adversely affected his ability to repay his debts, or any information beyond 
his statement. (Items 1-6) 
 
Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2010 to the present, Applicant accumulated three delinquent debts, totaling 
$43,270 that remain unpaid or unresolved.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two mitigating conditions might have partial 
applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of his wife’s employment were shown by 
Applicant to have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. Applicant does 
not state when his wife lost her job or how the decline of income adversely affected his 
ability to pay his debts. He also made assertions about selling the house whose 
mortgage was in foreclosure but did not submit any documents beyond a July 2014 
letter from the mortgage holder to show it was sold or he was free of that debt. He did 
not submit any documents to support his assertion that on July 7, 2014, the two other 
debts were paid. He merely makes a statement to that effect without any objective 
financial documents. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Applicant claims he paid two debts and he no longer owes any money on the 
rental home on whose mortgage he was delinquent. He has not shown by any 
documents, such as copies of checks, receipts, or written statements from the bank 
mortgage holder that any of the three debts are in fact paid. Applicant claims both small 
debts were paid on July 7, 2014. The significance of July 7, 2014, for payment is 
unexplained by Appellant and not supported by any objective financial proof. He fails to 
meet his burden of proof on this mitigating condition, AG ¶ 20 (d), and it does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action 
or administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 2. He disclaims any intentional action in doing so. However, his mortgage, 
which was the most significant debt, became delinquent in 2010. The e-QIP required 
him to report the seven-year history in Section 26 of the e-QIP. His $65 debt was also 
due and owing from 2010. He did not disclose it, either. Therefore, regardless of 
Applicant’s statements about payments, he did not disclose the debts that existed at the 
time he submitted his e-QIP. AG ¶ 16 (a) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any demonstrable action to resolve his delinquent 
debts. This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
based on the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this 
day, and is obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past 
performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies that had occurred in the 
previous seven years on his e-QIP. His mortgage delinquency was a significant debt 
and he should have disclosed it in Section 26. He deliberately failed to disclose his 
debts in 2012 when he signed the e-QIP.   
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations or Personal Conduct. I conclude the whole-person concept 
against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
