1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00097
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 9, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992) (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant furnished an undated reply to the SOR (RSOR) in writing. (Item 4.) On
September 14, 2014, she requested that her case be decided on the written record in
lieu of a hearing. (Item 5.)  On October 15, 2014, Department Counsel issued the
Department's written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was
provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered nine documentary
exhibits. (Items 1-9.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on November 27,
2014. Applicant did not submit additional evidence. The case was assigned to this
2
Administrative Judge on February 10, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 65 years old. She has been married to her third husband since 1989,
and she has two children and a stepson. Applicant is employed as a customer
representative by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with her employment in the defense sector. (Item 5.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists five allegations (1.a. through 1.e.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts. The debts listed on the SOR total more than $40,000. The
allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a.  This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $432. Applicant denied this allegation in her RSOR. She wrote that she had not been
with this phone service creditor for eight or nine years, and she had not been notified of
past due amounts (Item 4.) A full data credit report, dated November 1, 2013,
establishes that this debt is overdue. (Item 9.)
In her Personal Subject Interview (PSI), based on an Investigation of November 4,
2013 to November 25, 2013, Applicant stated that she was unaware of this account.
(Item 7.) I do not find any evidence to establish that Applicant took any action to satisfy
this debt once she became aware of it. This debt has not been resolved or reduced.
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$253.  In her RSOR, Applicant denied this SOR allegation. She wrote that she had a
dispute about this medical bill, but she believed it had been settled. (Item 4.) The full
data credit report establishes that this debt is overdue. (Item 9.)
In her PSI, Applicant stated that she was unaware of this account. (Item 7.) I do
not find any evidence to establish that Applicant took any action to satisfy this debt once
she became aware of it. This debt has not been resolved or reduced.
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a mortgage account that is 120 days
or more past due in the amount of $7,520.  In her RSOR, Applicant denied this SOR
allegation. She wrote that this debt is for refinancing her loan and she attached a
document that she contended showed that there is no longer any past due amount on
this debt. The document from the creditor shows a trial modification plan from the
mortgage holder with an amount owed of $10,386.22 and a total amount due under the
3
modification plan of $702.07. (Item 4.) The December 17, 2013 CR establishes that this
debt of $7,520 is owed. (Item 6.)
In her PSI, Applicant stated that this debt was for late fees from the creditor for
her home mortgage. (Item 7.) In reviewing the document from the creditor I find that
there has been an attempt to resolve this debt.
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $2,501. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation. She wrote that this debt
was from when she lived in an apartment. When she attempted to leave before the lease
had expired, she was told by the manager that if she paid her utilities she would not have
to pay the entire amount owed. When she learned of the debt, she claimed that she
attempted to have it resolved, but the manager was no longer present. (Item 4.) 
In her PSI, Applicant stated that she had been in contact with the creditor of this
debt, and she was trying to set up a payment plan to resolve the debt. (Item 7.) I do not
find any evidence to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the amount
of $39,042. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation. She wrote that this
debt may be from a voluntary repossession of a vehicle owned by her and her husband.
She contended that the amount owed may have been for the total value of the vehicle,
not considering how much Applicant had already paid for it and what the creditor
received when they sold it after the repossession. (Item 4.) The December 17, 2013 CR
establishes that this debt is owed. (Item 6.)
In her PSI, Applicant conceded that this debt was for a vehicle that was
repossessed. She stated that because she changed her employer, she was earning less
money, and could not afford to make payments on the vehicle. (Item 7.) I do not find any
evidence to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.
Applicant stated in her PSI that she planned to contact the creditors of all her
overdue debts to begin a payment plan with each of them. It was her intention to have all
of her overdue debts paid off by the end of 2015. (Item 7.) There has been no evidence
introduced to show Applicant had contacted any of the creditors, with the exception of
allegation 1.c., or made any attempt to resolve or reduce any of her other overdue debts.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
4
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, which has not been satisfied. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As reviewed
above, Applicant explained her financial difficulties, at least in part, because she earned
less money when she changed her employment. The condition that caused her financial
problems was within her control. Also, she has only resolved one of her debts.
Therefore, I do not find that she has acted responsibly, and I do not find that this
mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.
AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable, since Applicant has not “initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve all of her overdue debts,” but one.  I do
not find that any other mitigation condition applies to this case.
Finally, no evidence was introduced to establish Applicant will be able to pay off
her past debts or keep up to date on her current debts and expenses, Therefore, I find
that Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns, which are found
against Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are applicable, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1b.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d. - 1e.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
