1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00812 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He had seven charged-off and 
six collection accounts totaling almost $55,000. In 2014, judgments were entered 
against Applicant on four of the delinquent accounts. The delinquent accounts have not 
been resolved. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on April 9, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
On June 18, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
October 24, 2014. The FORM contained seven attachments (Items). On December 8, 
2014, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the 
response, which was admitted into the record. On March 16, 2015, I was assigned the 
case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied one debt (SOR 1.k, $55) stating it 
was paid, denied owing federal income tax for tax years 2010 and 2011, and admitted 
the remaining charged-off or collection accounts. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions 
as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old systems engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2007, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. Since 
February 2011, he has also worked part time as a security officer. He asserts he served 
honorably in the U.S. Navy from June 1978 through June 1999. The record is silent as 
to his grade at discharge. He receives $1,417 monthly in military retirement pay and 
earns $920 monthly from his part-time work as a security officer. (Item. 5) He produced 
no documentation as to his duty performance. 
 
 On July 3, 2012, Applicant completed a Personal Subject Interview (PSI) and 
was asked about his delinquent accounts. (Item 5) He indicated there was no specific 
reason for falling behind on his debt. He indicated his debts began to become 
delinquent a year and a half earlier. (Item 5) He had talked with a debt service about 
addressing his delinquent debts, but chose to attempt to address his debts by himself. 
Following the PSI, he made six $200 payments to the IRS to address unpaid taxes.  
 
 In Applicant’s December 2014 response to the FORM (FORM Answer), he 
indicated his financial difficulties were contributed to by: his mother-in-law needing 
special accommodations in her home; his brother’s death without insurance to cover 
burial services; his wife having lost her job prior to January 2014 due to knee surgery, 
but that she was now reemployed; his paying of college tuition for two children; his 
vehicle repairs of $3,000; and his drain pipe expenses costing another $700. 
 
 Applicant asserted he had used a lump-sum retirement payout from the company 
where he worked from June 1999 until December 2006 to pay his creditors. He provided 
no documentation showing how much he had paid or which creditors had been paid. He 
also asserted, 
 
I have been working diligently in recent weeks to resolve my outstanding 
debts and I can say that I have my financial situation under control. I have 
3 
 
paid several of my debts off, and have established payment arrangements 
with the remaining creditors. (FORM Answer) 
 
 Applicant provided no documentation showing what debts had been paid and 
what payment arrangements had been established. He provided no documentation to 
establish his financial situation was under control. 
 
 The SOR lists seven charged-off accounts and six collection accounts totaling 
$54,700 in delinquent debt. During his January 2014 PSI, he was questioned about 
seven of the delinquent accounts appearing on his May 2012 credit report. (Item 5, 6) 
All 13 of the SOR debts appear on his May 2012 and/or October 2014 credit reports. 
(Items 6, 7) In January 2014, he responded to written financial interrogatories. (Item 5) 
At that time, he provided a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) showing net monthly 
income of $7,341, net monthly expenses of $2,039, and $4,766 in monthly debt 
payments, half of which is his monthly mortgage payment ($2,311). The written financial 
interrogatories asked about each of the SOR delinquent accounts. His monthly budget 
indicated he was making no payments on the delinquent debts.  
 
 The debt listed in SOR 1.a ($8,104) was a charged-off account on which he was 
making no payments. The amount was the same as when he was questioned about the 
debt during his July 2012 PSI. He had made no payment on six SOR debts he had been 
questioned about in July 2012: SOR 1.e ($4,737), SOR 1.h ($2,607), SOR 1.i ($2,606), 
SOR 1.j ($18,729), SOR 1.l ($4,272), and SOR 1.m ($1,500). (Item 5)  
 
 In 2014, Applicant had four judgments entered against him on two charged-off 
accounts (SOR 1.b entered in April 2014 and SOR 1.g entered in March 2014) and on 
two collection accounts (SOR 1.i entered in May 2014 and SOR 1.j entered in August 
2014). (Item 7) These four judgments, totaling in excess of $26,000, remain unpaid. 
(Item 7)  
 
 Applicant paid the $55 collection account (SOR 1.k) and the $747 charged-off 
account (SOR 1.c) was marked “paid for less than the full balance” on his credit report. 
(Item 7) The IRS account transcripts show he owes no tax for tax years 2010 or 2011. 
(Item 3) He and his wife’s adjusted gross income for 2010 was $134,995 and for 2011, 
$152,358. (Item 3)  
 
 Applicant is married and has three adult children. (Item 4) Prior to his January 
2014 response to the written interrogatories, his wife had knee surgery that resulted in 
her losing her job of ten years. (Item 5) Her income made up 30 per cent of the 
household’s income. As of December 2014, she was reemployed. (FORM Answer)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
5 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In 2014, four judgments totaling in 
excess of $26,000 were entered against Applicant. He had charged-off accounts and 
collection accounts totaling more than $50,000, which remain unpaid. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not fully meet any of the financial considerations mitigating 
factors. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. His financial problems 
started in 2011, and the majority of his debts remain unpaid. During 2010, the 
household’s income was approximately $135,000, and in 2011, it was more than 
$152,000. He provided no documentation showing he received credit or financial 
counseling, that has he demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or 
that he has a plan to bring them under control. He has not acted responsibly in 
addressing his debts, nor shown evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to satisfy 
his debts.  
 
Because Applicant has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems are 
continuing in nature, he receives limited application of the mitigating conditions listed in 
AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Likewise, Applicant receives partial application of the mitigating conditions listed 
in AG ¶ 20(b). His wife lost her job of ten years following knee surgery. She was 
unemployed prior to January 2014 and was reemployed as of December 2014. Other 
than his assertion that her income represented 30 percent of the household’s income, 
he provided no documentation as to how this substantially affected his finances or how 
long she was out of work. Since January 2007, he has been gainfully employed full 
time, and since February 2011, he also has had a part-time job.  
 
Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his control, I must still consider whether Applicant has since 
acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties. ISCR Case 
No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 
(App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no 
showing Applicant received “financial counseling.” He asserted his financial situation is 
under control, but provided no documentation supporting that assertion.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the $55 collection account 
(SOR 1.k) he paid, the collection account paid for less than the full balance (SOR 1.c), 
and to his unpaid taxes, which have now been paid. Applicant has not documented his 
efforts to address the other delinquent accounts. Nor is there is documentary evidence 
to support he contacted any of his creditors or has arranged repayment plans. He 
asserted he paid some debts and arranged repayment agreement for the remaining 
7 
 
debts, but there is no documentation that any repayment plan was reached. Applicant 
has failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to fully evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or credibility. From the record, I am 
unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. Even if I found for him in these 
matters, there is no evidence of payment on the majority of his delinquent SOR debts.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide sufficient documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on only scant paragraphs of explanation in his FORM 
Answer, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
 
In Applicant’s July 2012 PSI, the January 2014 written financial interrogatories, 
and in the April 2014 SOR, Applicant was made aware his delinquent accounts were of 
security concern. In the two and a half years since his July 2012 interview, he has 
documented he paid $1,200 to the IRS, paid a $55 collection account, and had a 
charged-off account paid for less than the full amount. The record fails to show how 
much was paid on this account. His long-standing failure to repay his creditors, at least 
8 
 
in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise 
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
