 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02364 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. On October 28, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me 
 
2 
 
 
on November 5, 2014. On November 21, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for December 9, 
2014. The hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, while Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The record of the hearing 
was held open until December 16, 2014, to provide the Applicant the opportunity to 
submit documents. She submitted documents that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A though K. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on December 17, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee working for a defense contractor. She has 
been working in that job since March 2013. She graduated from high school in 1969 and 
earned two associate’s degrees between 1979 and 1988. She has been married for 41 
years and has an adult daughter. This is the first time Applicant has sought a position of 
trust.1 
  
The SOR alleged that Applicant had two delinquent debts totaling $19,389 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). Both debts were charged-off credit card accounts. In her Answer to the 
SOR, she admitted both allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.2 
 
In September 2009, Applicant was laid off from a job in which she earned 
$73,000 annually. Her husband was laid off from his job in 2000. He is now 70 years old 
and is no longer physically able to work. After she was laid off from her job, Applicant 
and her husband began living off of their savings, her $16,043 severance package, and 
his Social Security payments. She had credit card insurance on at least one of the 
delinquent credit card accounts that provided the insurance company would make the 
monthly payments if she lost her job. She did not immediately apply for the insurance 
payments when she lost her job because she had enough money to cover their monthly 
expenses. When the money began running out, she applied for unemployment 
compensation and contacted the insurance company. The insurance company refused 
to make the payments because she did not contact them immediately upon losing her 
job. In December 2011, she obtained a job earning the minimum wage as a sales 
representative at a large retail store.3 
 
In April 2012, Applicant obtained a new job earning about $36,000 annually. She 
attended technical training courses and received a computer programming certification 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 34-37; GE 1, 2. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 26-27, 29-31, 33-34, 37-40, 42-43; GE 1; AE E, F. 
 
3 
 
 
in July 2012. She continued to struggle financially with her new job. She had only 
enough money to make partial payments on some of her bills, including the two alleged 
credit card debts. The two credit card companies made demands for full payment of the 
past-due amounts. Applicant did not have the money to make those payments. The 
credit card companies stopped sending her bills, and she stopped making the partial 
payments. In March 2013, she obtained her current job in which she earns about 
$83,000.4 
 
In November 2013, the creditor of the $8,934 debt in SOR ¶ 1.b instituted legal 
action against Applicant. In March 2014, she reached a settlement agreement with that 
creditor. Under that agreement, she made a payment of $500 and agreed to make 
monthly payments of $388 until the debt was paid. Those payments are made by 
automatic deductions from her checking account. She provided proof of those payments 
from March through November 2014.5 
 
Applicant testified that she had yet to hear from the creditor of the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.a. She indicated that, when the creditors stopped sending her bills, she did not know 
what to do. At the hearing, she testified that she planned to contact that creditor in 
January 2015 because she would have some of her other debts paid off by then. She 
indicated that she will resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.6 
 
Applicant’s husband is the one who handles the paying of the bills. She has not 
received financial counseling. With the exception of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, she 
testified that she had no other delinquent debts. Her credit report dated August 13, 
2013, reflected that she had 25 accounts that were paid “as agreed.” She and her 
husband never fell behind on their mortgage payments because that was always their 
first priority. She indicated that they no longer use credit cards.7 
 
In her post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted a budget that reflected her 
and her husband’s net monthly income was $5,452, that their total monthly expenses 
were $3,051, and that their total monthly debt payments were $1,288, which left them a 
net monthly remainder of about $1,113. In that budget, the monthly debt payments 
included a payment of $388 for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. She has about $47,000 in a 
401(k) plan. For the past year, Applicant’s and her husband’s checking account has had 
an ending monthly balance that ranged between $2,680 and $6,343.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. 27-29; GE 1, 3; AE D. 
5Tr. 27-28; 31-34, 39-40; GE 3; AE C, K. The payments for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b are made to the 
attorney who represented the creditor in the legal proceeding. 
6 Tr. 28, 45-47; GE 3. Interestingly, Applicant has another credit card account from this same 
creditor as the one listed in SOR ¶ 1.a that was past-due for a period, but was current at the time of the 
hearing. 
7 Tr. 28, 40-45; GE 2, 3; AE G, H, I, J. 
8 Tr. 40-45; AE B, K. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) In a memorandum dated November 19, 2004, the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) indicated that trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply the procedures contained in the Directive before making a 
determination. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable to satisfy for an 
extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s husband was laid off from his job in 2000. At some point, he began 
collecting Social Security payments. In 2009, Applicant was laid off from her job in 
 
6 
 
 
which she earned $73,000 annually. She was unemployed for over a year and a half 
before obtaining a minimum wage job. Her and her husband’s unemployment as well as 
her underemployment were conditions beyond her control that caused the alleged 
financial problems. In March 2013, she obtained a job in which she earned $83,000 
annually. In November 2013, the creditor of the debt in SOR 1.b instituted legal action 
against Applicant for that debt and she later reached a settlement agreement with that 
creditor. She has been making regular payments to the creditor under that agreement. 
Her husband handles the finances and she appears to lack a clear understanding of the 
debt collection process. She credibly testified that she did not know what to do when 
she stopped receiving bills from the creditors. She further testified that she planned to 
contact the creditor of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a in January 2015 and take action to resolve 
that debt. AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply because of her delay in taking action to 
resolve the alleged debts after she obtained her current job. Nevertheless, her financial 
situation is now stable. She has no other delinquent debts. I am convinced that she will 
resolve the alleged debts and remain financially stable.9 I find that her financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(c), and 20(d) partially apply.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.10 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
                                                          
 9 The Government can revalidate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports 
and investigations. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from subsequently 
revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past 
conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” ISCR 
Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a security context to 
pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may support future revocation 
of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, 
or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 
2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security 
clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works on her financial 
problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
10 The nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, outweighs the security concerns at issue. Applicant met her burden of 
persuasion and mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to her eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
   
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a position of 
trust. Eligibility to access sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
