 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03855 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for alcohol 
consumption and criminal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and J (criminal conduct). DOD CAF 
took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. On 
 
2 
 
September 6, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 21, 2014, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5.  
 
On December 30, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any additional 
information and objections within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 7, 2015, and did not submit any objections or additional matters within the 
allotted period. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2015.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old engineer who has been working for a defense 
contractor since April 2001. She graduated from high school in 1976 and did not list any 
higher education on her security clearance application. She has been married twice. 
Her current marriage began in 1996. She has one adult child. She applied for her first 
security clearance in October 2009.1  
 
 The SOR set forth four Guideline G allegations, including three instances in 
which Applicant was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). The 
three DUI incidents were also cross-alleged under a single Guideline J allegation. In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the four Guideline G allegations and did not 
respond to the Guideline J allegation.2   
 
 In Section 22 (Police Record) of her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) dated October 20, 2009, Applicant disclosed that she was charged 
with DUI in February 1982. In the “action taken” block of that section, she listed “fine 
and classes.”3  
 
Through Applicant’s SOR admissions, the following allegations were established: 
 
 a. Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and the point of intoxication, to 
at least August 2012; 
 
 b. On August 24, 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. On 
January 9, 2013, she pled guilty to that offense and was sentenced to 230 hours of 
community service, 18 months of DUI classes, five years of probation, and ordered to 
pay $2,600 in restitution; and 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
2 Items 1 and 3. 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 c. On February 11, 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged DUI. On March 29, 
2011, she was found guilty of that offense and was sentenced to a $1,952 fine, ordered 
to perform two days of public service, volunteer for 100 hours of community service, and 
placed on probation for five years.4 
 
 A Joint Personnel Adjudication System entry dated January 22, 2013, reflected 
that Applicant’s sentence for her 2012 DUI consisted of a fine of $2,600, five years of 
probation, 96 hours of home detention, 230 hours of community service, and 18-month 
multiple conviction program.5 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
I admit that I have consumed alcohol at times in excess and to the point of 
intoxication. I was in denial that I had a problem with alcohol up until a DUI 
arrest on August 24 of 2012. On August 27th 2012 I made a decision that I 
had to stop consuming alcohol completely. I am pleased to declare that I 
celebrated my second year of sobriety August 28th 2014. With the help of 
SMART recovery, I acquired tools for self-management of my addictive 
behavior. I attended 18 months of . . . a Court ordered DUI program. I was 
made aware of the damaging effects alcohol has on my body, 
relationships, finances, career, and self-esteem. Addiction can be an 
ongoing battle and it is comforting to know that there is always the 
fellowship of AA meetings throughout the country. Utmost and foremost I 
receive strength from my relationship with God.6 
 
Applicant presented documentation showing that she completed an 18-month 
court-ordered DUI program on August 23, 2014. 7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
4 Item 3. 
5 Item 5. 
6 Item 3. Smart Recovery is an addiction recovery support group. See http://www.smart 
recovery.org/?gclid=CNqxpKrZrcQCFUU8gQod9poA3w. 
7 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 22. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant consumed alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication until 
August 2012. She was convicted of DUI offenses that occurred in 1982, 2011, and 
2012. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 Three mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Besides Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, no details concerning the 
frequency and nature of her alcohol consumption were provided. Her 1982 DUI 
occurred over 33 years ago when she was about 23 years old and is of limited security 
significance. Her latest DUI offenses occurred between 2½ and 4 years ago when she 
was in her 50s. As indicated in her Answer to the SOR, she did not realize that she had 
an alcohol problem until her most recent DUI offense. Since then, she has completed an 
18-month court-ordered DUI program and participated in the SMART Recovery 
program. She acknowledged that she has an addiction. Most importantly, she has not 
consumed alcohol for over the past 2½ years. She recognizes that her alcohol problem 
in an ongoing battle and relies on AA meetings as a means of confronting her problem. 
She is well along the road to recovery and has established a pattern of abstinence. No 
prognosis of her condition from a qualified professional has been provided. AG ¶ 23(b) 
applies. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(d) partially apply. 
 
6 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;   
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;  
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and  
 
(e) violation of parole and probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has been convicted of three DUIs. Her most recent DUI occurred while 
she was on probation. She will remain on probation until approximately January 2018. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under AG ¶ 
32 and following are pertinent: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 The main security concern is Applicant’s alcohol consumption. All of her criminal 
conduct resulted from her consumption of alcohol. As discussed under Guideline G, 
Applicant no longer consumes alcohol and has not done so for over 2½ years. Her 
criminal conduct is unlikely to recur because she has ceased consuming alcohol. She is 
remorseful for her wrongdoing. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
 
7 
 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record, including her 14 years of employment in her current job. I find 
that Applicant has met her burden of persuasion and mitigated the alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to her eligibility to access classified information. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
