 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-04213 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 22, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On 
October 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On November 10, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 15, 
2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On January 23, 
2015, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On January 23, 2015, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing 
for February 12, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call 
any witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
received into evidence without objection.  
 
 I held the record open until February 27, 2015, to afford Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents, and at his request, I granted him an 
extension until March 12, 2015. Applicant timely submitted AE E through G, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On February 24, 2015, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c with explanations, 
and denied ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old direct care staff member, who has a pending 
application with a defense contractor to work as a security guard overseas. Obtaining 
a security clearance is a condition of employment. Currently, he works with a 
residential program for at-risk youth. (GE 1; Tr. 19-24.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in Jamaica in July 1987.1 He was 
awarded a certificate in paralegal training in June 2011. Applicant was awarded his 
GED in the United States in August 2011, which was a condition of his attending 
community college. He was awarded an associate in science degree in criminal justice 
technology in December 2013. (GE 1, AE B, Tr. 24-25.) 
 
Applicant was previously married from June 1997 to April 2006, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He has been living with a cohabitant since December 
2007. Applicant has two sons from his marriage, ages 12 and 9, who live with his 
former spouse and to whom he pays $900 in monthly child support. He also has a 5-
year-old daughter with his cohabitant. Applicant’s former spouse is employed as a 
                                                          
1
 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2003. (GE 1.) 
 
3 
 
 
counselor and his cohabitant is employed as an elementary school teacher. (GE 1, AE 
A, GE 2, Tr. 25-28, 31, 36.) 
 
Applicant has been a member of the Army National Guard since January 2004, 
and holds the rank of sergeant (pay grade E-5). He has been deployed twice, once to 
Afghanistan from May 2005 to August 2006, and once to Kuwait from January 2010 to 
December 2010. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 28-29.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains four separate allegations consisting of a collection 
account for $1,235, a collection account for $4,336, a collection account for $9,401, 
and a collection account for $3,072. These debts are noted in Applicant’s March 2013 
and April 2014 credit reports. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.d; GE 3, GE 4.) All of these debts stem 
from Applicant’s previous marriage. (Tr. 29-33.) 
 
The following summarizes the status of each SOR debt:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Credit card collection account for $1,235. Per Applicant’s marital 
settlement agreement, he was solely responsible for this debt. This account was 
subsequently sold and assumed by another creditor. See SOR ¶ 1.b. DUPLICATE 
ACCOUNT.  (AE A, Tr. 34-38, 55-58, 67, 69-71.) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – Credit card collection account for $4,336. This creditor purchased 
the account from the credit card holder in SOR ¶ 1.a. and as a result of penalties and 
interest, the debt increased substantially. (AE A; Tr. 34-38, 67, 69-71.) Applicant 
settled and paid this account for $1,500. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E.)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c – Credit card collection account for $9,401. Per Applicant’s marital 
settlement agreement, he and his wife were to split this debt. Applicant’s wife is willing 
to acknowledge that she was responsible for half of this debt; however, she is either 
unwilling or unable to pay her portion. Applicant realized that his responsibility for 
paying the debt remains. Applicant settled and paid this account for $3,300. 
ACCOUNT RESOLVED.  (AE E, AE F; Tr. 34-38, 56-58, 67-68, 71-72.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Collection account for $3,072. The debt is money Applicant owes 
to the local section 8 housing authority for a rental property he owns. Applicant 
entered into a payment agreement with the housing authority and is making $500 
monthly payments. ACCOUNT BEING RESOLVED. (AE G, Tr. 48-55, 66-68, 72-74.) 
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Apart from these debts, 
Applicant is current on all of his other obligations to include child support. (Tr. 74-75.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted his Army National Guard non-commissioned officer 
evaluations reports for the years 2011 to 2014, all of which were favorable. 
Additionally, he submitted numerous letters and awards recognizing his service in 
Afghanistan and Kuwait as well as his stateside service. Applicant’s DD-214 indicates 
that he was awarded or authorized the following decorations, medals, badges, 
citations and campaign ribbons: Afghanistan Campaign Medal with Campaign Star, 
Army Commendation Medal, Army Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service 
Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Iraq Campaign Medal with Campaign 
Star, Army Service Ribbon, Overseas Service Ribbon, and Armed Forces Service 
Medal with M Device. Lastly, his cohabitant submitted a personal recommendation 
attesting to his good character. (AE C.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
 
5 
 
 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s divorce was costly and 
contentious. Additionally, his former spouse did not comply with their separation 
agreement leaving Applicant solely responsible for the marital debt. As noted supra, 
Applicant has paid or is resolving all of his debts and has made substantial progress in 
regaining financial responsibility.2  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(e) are not applicable. Applicant’s budget demonstrates that 
he living within his means. Having paid or in the process of resolving the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, Applicant is able to receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(d). 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s military service, especially his service in Afghanistan and Kuwait, 
weighs heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of 
society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his 
SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
 
8 
 
 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Due to circumstances beyond his control, Applicant’s debts became delinquent. 
Despite the financial setback as a result of his divorce, it is clear from Applicant’s 
actions that he is on the road to a full financial recovery. These factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery and steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his character evidence, and 
his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
