1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01270
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred several delinquent small business debts, after turning over
daily operations to an employee, when he started work for a larger company. He fully
resolved all of them after learning of their existence, and has sufficient income to remain
solvent. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 19, 2013. On May
13, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information,
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on June 3, 2014, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on October 14, 2014. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2014. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Video Teleconference
Hearing on December 16, 2014, setting the hearing date for January 15, 2015. I
convened the hearing as scheduled, with Department Counsel participating from DOHA
Headquarters by video teleconference. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2,
which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel also submitted GE 3 for
identification and possible use during testimony, but did not offer it for admission.
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection, and
testified on his own behalf. His supervisor also testified. I granted Applicant’s request to
leave the record open until January 29, 2015, for submission of additional evidence.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2015. On January 28,
2015, Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s post-hearing evidentiary submission
without objection to its admission. These documents were marked AE E and admitted
into the record. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since March 2010. He is a high school graduate with one year of college
classes. He has no military service and has never held a security clearance. He is
married, for a second time, with four adult children and stepchildren. (GE 1; Tr. 38.) 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.i, with
explanations including that three of them reflected different credit report entries
concerning the same underlying debt. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through
1.e, and 1.j; and provided receipts documenting prior payment of those alleged debts.
(AR.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the following findings.
Applicant purchased a small sheet metal business in 2001, and operated it
successfully until late 2003 when he obtained a good job as a project manager with a
larger company. He did not incorporate his business, and remained personally liable for
its debts. He left the company to be managed by his accountant/bookkeeper, who failed
to pay some required state employment and property taxes over the subsequent three
or four years. After having to personally pay delinquent employment taxes on several
occasions, Applicant decided to close the business and sold his machinery and
equipment to a competitor. When he looked at a credit report for the first time in
connection with completing his SF 86, he discovered that he also had state tax liens
that had been filed against him for unpaid property taxes on his business equipment for
tax years 2004 through 2008. These liens are the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c,
and 1.e, totaling $1,253. Applicant promptly paid these taxes in July 2013, and received
documentation from the state showing that the liens had been released. A $967 tax lien
that was presumably for employment taxes was also filed against him in November
2007, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He paid those taxes, and the lien was fully released in
April 2010. (AR; GE 2; AE D; Tr. 40-47, 50.)
3
The three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.h all pertain to a vehicle loan
that Applicant used to buy a truck for his business in 2003. The first two are based on
reports to different credit bureaus on different dates by the credit union that bought the
loan from the dealer on the date of sale. The third is an entry by the collection agency to
whom the credit union transferred the deficiency balance, after voluntary repossession
and sale of the truck in 2007 when the business was closed. Applicant paid this
deficiency balance (which had grown to $9,327) to the collection agency by cashier’s
check on August 29, 2014; and provided a January 21, 2015 letter from the credit union
confirming that the balance due on this debt had been paid in full through the third party
collection agency. (AR; GE 2; AE A; AE E; Tr. 47-50.)
The $2,.860 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i was another debt arising from Applicant’s
small business. In 2007 a customer filed a claim against his bonding company in
connection with the installation of a heating and air conditioning system. Applicant’s
insurance paid the claim, but he thought that he had successfully disputed
responsibility. After discovering the debt remained outstanding, he contacted the
collection agency that acquired the debt from the insurance company, and paid them in
full by cashier’s check. He submitted a letter from the agency, dated September 2,
2014, acknowledging payment in full, with a zero balance due. (AR; Tr. 52.)
SOR ¶ 1.j alleged that a $332 medical debt had been placed for collection and
remained unpaid. Applicant denied this allegation, and provided proof that he paid this
debt on January 16, 2014. (AR; AE A; Tr. 53-54.)
Applicant provided his family budget spread sheet showing monthly income of
$8,480 and expenses of $4,818; leaving a remainder of $3,662. He testified in a
sincere, organized, and credible manner. His supervisor, the company’s general
manager, also testified on his behalf. This witness attested to Applicant’s good
character, reliability, trustworthiness, and track record of discretion in protecting the
company’s proprietary information. Four other current and former supervisors, who
know Applicant well, wrote letters describing his outstanding character, responsibility,
dedicated performance, and compliance with rules. (AE B; AE E; Tr. 66-71.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
4
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The record evidence potentially raises security concerns under two Guideline F
DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Applicant had some delinquent debts, all but one of which arose after he turned
over the daily operations of the business he formerly owned to an employee. The
remaining debt involved a small medical account that he had paid four months before
the SOR was issued. These facts provide substantial evidence under the foregoing
DCs, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate resulting security concerns.
The SOR allegations and evidence do not support any other DC under this guideline. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems arose from the mismanagement of his former
business by the employee to whom he entrusted operations while he traveled in his new
position as a project manager for a larger company. As he became aware of each debt,
he resolved it satisfactorily. He no longer owns the business, has resolved all formerly
delinquent debts, and has a substantial monthly surplus of income over expenses. The
evidence demonstrates that financial issues are unlikely to recur and do not reflect
6
adversely on Applicant’s current reliability and judgment. Applicant established
substantial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). 
Applicant fully repaid and satisfied all of his formerly delinquent debts, and has
sufficient income to remain financially solvent. These facts establish additional
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a sincere and
mature individual, who accepted accountability for his valid debts and successfully
resolved them. His positive actions to address both the sources and results of his
indebtedness have substantially eliminated the potential for pressure, coercion, or
duress, and make continuation or recurrence of significant financial problems unlikely.
His debts of potential concern initially arose without his knowledge, and he successfully
addressed them in a responsible manner upon becoming aware of their existence. His
current solvency and financial responsibility demonstrate permanent behavioral
changes. Overall, the record evidence creates no doubt as to Applicant’s present
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
