 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02363 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 March 13, 2015 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug, alcohol, and personal conduct security concerns 
that arose out of his infrequent recreational drug use from September 2010 to October 
2013 and his alcohol consumption during college. Applicant has been candid with the 
Department of Defense about his illegal drug involvement, and does not intend to use 
any illegal drugs, including marijuana, in the future. His alcohol consumption since 
graduating with his bachelor’s degree has been significantly reduced and is responsible. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 6, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines H, Drug Involvement; G, Alcohol Consumption; and E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
 
2 
 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on October 30, 2014 and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 21, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 21, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 25, 
2015. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and introduced 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. The 
record was left open for the receipt of additional documentation. On February 25, 2015, 
Applicant presented two pages of documentation, marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) E. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE E and it was admitted. The record then 
closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 3, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old employee of a government contractor. He is single, 
and has no children. He graduated from an undergraduate school in May 2014. He 
seeks his first DoD security clearance in connection with his work. (GE 1; Tr. 12.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that between September 2010 and October 2013, Applicant 
used marijuana. He also consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of 
intoxication, while attending college. Applicant was candid about his drug use on his e-
QIP, in his Answer, and during his testimony. (GE 1; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was recreational in nature, and occurred 
approximately six times between September 2010 and October 2013. He used it twice 
in 2010 at parties. He did not like it and did not use it again until 2013, when a girl he 
was dating offered it to him. He used it four times in 2013, with his last use occurring in 
October 2013. He never purchased marijuana. Applicant stopped using marijuana when 
he learned that he would be applying for a security clearance. He recognized that 
marijuana use was illegal and that he could not engage in illegal activities while holding 
a security clearance. He testified that he made a conscience decision to disassociate 
himself from all marijuana users, including his former girlfriend. In his post-hearing 
statement, he further indicated he has no desire to use any illegal drugs again. He 
signed a statement of intent demonstrating he would not abuse any drugs in the future. 
(GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 12-30; AE E.) 
 
 Applicant first consumed alcohol at the age of 17, at a friend’s birthday party. He 
consumed alcohol approximately once per year from age 17 to 21. When he turned 21, 
his alcohol consumption increased significantly. He consumed alcohol approximately 
four times per week. He typically drank four 12-ounce bottles of beer or between six and 
nine ounces of liquor on the weekends. He limited himself to two bottles of beer or 
glasses of wine on the weekdays, a couple times per week. He consumed alcohol with 
his college friends. However, he graduated in May 2014 from undergraduate school and 
 
3 
 
his alcohol consumption has decreased significantly. He now limits himself to the 
occasional beer or glass of wine with dinner four to five times per month. He has had no 
alcohol-related criminal incidents. (GE 2; Tr. 20-25.) 
  
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by the letters he 
entered into evidence. He is considered to be “a model employee” by his manager. He 
is thought to be “an honest and trustworthy person” by those that know him. He 
conducts himself with a “high sense of ethics.” (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The condition at issue based on Applicant’s conduct is: 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent.  
 
 Applicant admitted he consumed alcohol frequently, and in excess, from age 21 
through age 22. The above disqualifying condition applied at that time. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns. The following condition applies: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s excessive alcohol use occurred during the final year of his 
undergraduate education. It involved no arrests. He has matured since he graduated 
and entered the professional world. He limits his alcohol consumption to an occasional 
one or two drinks with dinner. His excessive alcohol use is unlikely to recur, given that 
he is no longer a student and has an entirely different social environment. His alcohol 
consumption as a student does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, as attested by his manager and other colleagues. Applicant has 
mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. 
 
 
 
5 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse. 
 
The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual allegation 
under Guideline H. Applicant used marijuana six times between September 2010 and 
October 2013. The facts established through the Government’s evidence and through 
Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under the above disqualifying condition.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following is potentially applicable: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
While Applicant’s illegal drug use spanned a three-year period, Applicant has 
made a number of significant changes in his life during the past 17 months that 
demonstrate his serious commitment to abstinence from illegal substances. He 
recognized that he was wrong to use marijuana. He ceased using all drugs prior to 
applying for a security clearance. He testified he immediately departs any situation 
where drug use is present. He disassociated himself from drug-using friends and 
associates. Applicant’s drug use occurred largely while he was attending undergraduate 
school. He is now in the work force and no longer attends school. Thus, he has 
changed his environment. While the Directive does not define what constitutes “an 
appropriate period of abstinence” under AG ¶ 26(b)(3), his candor about his drug abuse 
leads me to accept as credible his assertions of no future intent to any illegal substance 
under any circumstances. Applicant has demonstrated sufficient intent not to use any 
illegal drugs in the future. He signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. He has matured and understands that any illegal drug 
involvement is incompatible with his defense contractor employment. Applicant has 
presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the Government’s concerns under AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
 
6 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use and excessive alcohol use could potentially create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his illegal drug use and excessive alcohol use that 
occurred while he was in college. He is now a working professional and no longer uses 
illegal substances. He responsibly limits his alcohol consumption. He is well respected 
by his current employer. Future unreliable, inappropriate, and illegal behavior is unlikely 
to occur. AG ¶ 17(c) and 17(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s infrequent but 
illegal drug use occurred six times. He was irresponsible at the time and did not 
recognize the seriousness of his actions. He also consumed alcohol to excess. He has 
now matured. He has not used illegal substances for more than 17 months after 
deciding that there was no room for illegal substances in his future professional life. He 
has significantly curtailed his use of alcohol. His changes are permanent and the 
likelihood of recurrence is extremely low. Applicant is respected by those who know 
him. He has a reputation for honestly and trustworthiness. Applicant’s current reputation 
for honesty, coupled with his candor concerning his past drug use, adds weight to his 
commitment to abstain from illegal drug use. The record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant is eligible to be granted a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
