1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01810
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred substantial delinquent indebtedness but, despite regular full-
time employment and apparent surplus income, demonstrated neither means nor efforts
to resolve the large majority of it. The evidence is insufficient to mitigate resulting
security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on May 28, 2013.
On June 26, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1,
2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on July 22, 2014, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on October 23, 2014. The case was assigned to me on October 27, 2014. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Video Teleconference
Hearing on December 10, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on January
12, 2015. Applicant and the court reporter attended the hearing in person. Department
Counsel participated from DOHA Headquarters by video teleconference. The
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf, I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record
open until January 26, 2015, for submission of documentary evidence. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 21, 2015. Applicant submitted no
documentary evidence after the hearing. Department Counsel obtained an updated
credit report on Applicant’s behalf which was offered admitted as GE 3 without objection
from Applicant on January 26, 2015, and the record closed. (Tr. 51; GE 3.)
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since October 2012. He also held full-time employment in several other jobs
throughout the five preceding years. He is single, with no children. He is a high school
graduate, and took college classes from a for-profit university from November 2005 to
August 2009 without earning a degree. He has no military service and has never held a
security clearance. (GE 1.) 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations concerning
delinquent debts set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.l, and 1.r through 1.t. He denied the
other 6 SOR allegations of delinquent debts; claiming that the two medical collection
accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($108) and 1.q ($178) had been paid, and that the four student
loan accounts (totaling $89,022) alleged to be 90 days or more past due in SOR ¶¶ 1.m
through 1.p. were current. (AR.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the following
findings.
Applicant testified that he would obtain and submit proof of payment of the two
medical debts he claimed to have paid. He did not do so. (AR; Tr. 23-24, 37, 44.) He
also failed to supply any evidence to corroborate his claim that the four SALLIE MAE
student loan accounts alleged to be past due in SOR ¶¶ 1.m through 1.p were current.
He testified that he paid, “670-plus dollars a month,” toward these debts. Department
Counsel provided a credit report, dated January 15, 2015, that shows four NAVIENT
student loan accounts with a total outstanding balance of $87,368; toward which
Applicant is current with monthly payments that total $690. I conclude that these are the
same student loans that were formerly held by SALLIE MAE. The new credit report also
shows that the two medical collection accounts were paid as of August 2014. (AR; GE
2; GE 3; Tr. 45.)
In his testimony, Applicant confirmed his admissions that he owes the delinquent
student loan debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b through 1.l and 1.r through 1.t, totaling
3
$74,155. He said that he thought he had made some payments toward some of them,
but would need to investigate and provide the details. He furnished no further
information concerning these debts. He also testified that he stopped making mortgage
payments in 2011 toward the home he purchased for $217,000 in 2009, but continued
living there for about another year before the lender took possession in a foreclosure
proceeding. The most recent information in the record credit reports shows that, as of
March 2013, Applicant was 120 days or greater past due on the loan in the amount of
$27,605; with a total balance due of $217,058. Applicant provided no documentation
concerning any foreclosure action or any potential remaining deficiency debt. (AR; GE
2; GE 3; Tr. 28-31, 35-44.)
Applicant testified that he estimated his monthly income at about $2,600 leaving
him with discretionary funds of about $300 per month after meeting his living expenses.
He did not provide detailed budget or financial statement, despite being offered the
opportunity to do so. (Tr. 46-48.) Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality
of his professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track
record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security
procedures. He submitted no character references describing his judgment,
trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
4
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The record evidence potentially raises security concerns under two Guideline F
DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant repaid two SOR-listed delinquent medical debts totaling $286; and
brought four of his student loans (totaling $87,368) into a current status. However, he
accrued more than $290,000 in other delinquent debts over the past five years, and
demonstrated neither the means nor any effort to resolve them. These substantial debts
raise security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.
5
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and ongoing, without indication that the
circumstances under which they arose have changed. He therefore failed to establish
substantial mitigation under MC 20(a). 
Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under
MC 20(b). He voluntarily incurred all of the debt in question, and has been fully
employed during the period the payments became delinquent. This is not responsible
action under the circumstances.
Applicant did provide any evidence of financial counseling. He repaid two small
medical debts, and brought four student loans into a current status. However, he neither
documented any effort to repay or otherwise resolve the substantial remaining SOR-
listed delinquent debts, nor asserted a legitimate basis to dispute their validity. These
facts preclude significant mitigation under MC 20(c), (d), or (e). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has incurred
substantial delinquent indebtedness that he has made no effort to repay. These debts
remain outstanding, creating the ongoing potential for pressure and duress. The
evidence does not support a finding that continuation or recurrence are unlikely, or that
behavioral changes demonstrate rehabilitation. He is a mature and experienced
individual who is accountable for his choices and financial irresponsibility. Overall, the
record evidence creates ongoing doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability
for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m through 1.q: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.r through 1.t: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
