 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02706 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 18, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct security 
concerns arose out of Applicant’s marijuana use between May 2000 and May 2005, to 
include its use while holding a security clearance after February 2003. Additionally, he 
was arrested in February 2000 and May 2005 for drug offenses. Personal Conduct 
security concerns arose out of Applicant’s false answers to questions about his drug 
abuse history on a 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigative Processing (e-QIP). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2013, Applicant completed an e-QIP. On September 23, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement; Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 16, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2015. 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
21, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 25, 2015. The 
Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 3, 2015.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing on February 25, 2015, I amended the SOR in order to conform to 
the evidence, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17. (Tr. 37.) The amendment changed the 
date of Applicant’s arrest alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d from August 2007 to May 2005. The 
allegation, as amended, reads: 
 
d. In approximately May 2005, you were charged with Possession of 
Marijuana for Sale. You were convicted and sentenced to five days in jail. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old government contractor. He has worked for his 
employer for the past 14 years. He has held a security clearance in connection with his 
employment since 2003. He is a high school graduate. He has never been married and 
has no children. (GE 1; Tr. 21-23.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance under the 
guidelines for Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct because he used, purchased, 
and sold marijuana, before and while holding a security clearance. Additional concerns 
resulted from Applicant’s two drug-related arrests in 2000 and 2005. Personal Conduct 
security concerns arose out of Applicant’s answers to questions about his drug activity 
on his e-QIP. All of these facts raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. 
(Answer.) 
  
 Applicant’s first used marijuana in high school. He used marijuana approximately 
twice a week in social settings with friends. He purchased marijuana for his personal 
consumption. (Tr. 23-32.) 
 
 In 2000, Applicant was driving when a police officer pulled over his vehicle. He 
was arrested and charged with driving under the influence of a controlled substance; 
possession of a controlled substance; and possession of marijuana while driving. He 
pled guilty to driver in possession of marijuana and was sentenced to two years of 
probation, a fine of $500, and community service. Despite his arrest and probationary 
 
3 
 
status, he continued to use marijuana. He was aware that marijuana use was illegal. 
(GE 2; Tr. 23-33.) 
 
 In May 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana 
for sale. Applicant was in a car with his friends when they were stopped by police. He 
had approximately an ounce of marijuana in his possession at the time of the arrest. His 
friend, who was also in the vehicle, had a smaller amount of the same variety of 
marijuana in his possession. Applicant was accused of selling it to his friend, although 
Applicant testified that he did not sell it. Applicant was convicted of this charge, and 
served five days in jail as the result of this arrest. He did not report this arrest to his 
employer because he was scared he would lose his job. Applicant testified that he has 
not used marijuana since this arrest in 2005. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted that 
he used marijuana through August 2007, but that was based on his mistaken 
recollection of the date on which this arrest occurred. (GE 2; Tr. 31-39.) 
 
  On March 12, 2013, Applicant completed an e-QIP in connection with his 
position with a government contractor. The e-QIP asked three pertinent questions in 
“Section 23 –Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity,” including: “In the last seven (7) 
years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled substances?”; “In the last seven 
(7) years, have you been involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation, 
trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, handling or sale of any drug or 
controlled substance?”; and “Have you EVER illegally used or otherwise been involved 
with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance other than 
previously listed?”. Applicant answered each of these questions, “No.” Applicant 
testified that he disclosed an August 2007 arrest under “Section 22, Police Record,” on 
his e-QIP, which he thought was the date of his second arrest for possession of 
marijuana for sale. He testified that he was rushing to complete the e-QIP and failed to 
disclose his marijuana use in Section 23. (Tr. 39-40.)  
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by the friends and 
co-workers that wrote letters of support on his behalf. He is considered to be honest and 
trustworthy. He is dedicated to his work, and has an excellent work ethic. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
 
4 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d). Applicant used marijuana from at least 
2000 to 2005 on a weekly basis. He purchased it in quantities of up to one ounce. His 
use of marijuana continued after being granted a security clearance in 2003, and led to 
two drug-related arrests and convictions. The facts established through the 
Government’s evidence and through Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns 
under all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
Applicant has worked hard to excel in his career, as described by those who 
know him. Since his last marijuana use almost ten years ago, Applicant has matured. 
He has not used any type of legal or illegal intoxicant since 2005. These mitigating 
factors are considerable, but are outweighed by other evidence in this case.  
 
Applicant used marijuana twice a week from 2000 to 2005, including while 
possessing a security clearance. He indicated that he knew marijuana use was illegal 
and that he should not use marijuana while holding a security clearance, yet he placed 
his own desires above requirements of the national interest. He neither submitted a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation, nor 
offered any testimony about his future intent to abstain from marijuana use. He did not 
provide evidence of disassociation from his marijuana using friends. Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns relating to his Drug Involvement. None of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant pled guilty to Driver in Possession of Marijuana in 2000. He was 
arrested again in 2005 and charged with Possession of Marijuana for Sale. He was 
convicted and served five days in jail. He also illegally used MJ twice a week for five 
years, despite not having been formally charged of this conduct. The above 
disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has been arrested twice, in 2000 and 2005. Both arrests were related 
to marijuana. Applicant presented little evidence of rehabilitation. He has not been fully 
forthright with the government concerning his marijuana use. I cannot find future 
criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) were not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
7 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant was dishonest about the full extent of his illegal drug activity when he 
completed and certified the truth of his e-QIP. He deliberately omitted use, purchase, 
and sale of marijuana through May 2005. Additionally, he did not disclose that he had 
used marijuana while possessing a security clearance from 2003 to May 2005 on his 
2013 E-QIP. His drug involvement and criminal activity also create a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under this 
guideline. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
8 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant failed to present information that he made a prompt, good-faith effort to 
correct his false denials of drug abuse on his e-QIP. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant made poor decisions to violate laws and security policy by using, 
purchasing, and selling marijuana. Further, he chose to lie about his marijuana use on 
his e-QIP. Applicant exhibited a pattern of exercising poor judgment in falsifying his e-
QIP and by using marijuana while holding a security clearance. He failed to produce 
sufficient evidence that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Mitigation under 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) was not established.  
 
 Applicant has earned an excellent reputation for honesty and trustworthiness at 
work. However, not enough time has passed to know whether Applicant could again be 
tempted to violate laws or other rules for his own personal benefit, as he did when used 
marijuana or when he knowingly falsified his e-QIP. AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is highly respected 
by those who know him. He testified he has not used marijuana since May 2005. 
However, his testimony lacks credibility as a result of his choice to falsify his e-QIP in 
2013. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a-3.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
