 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00284 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Clarissa T. Edwards, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges two debts totaling $41,198. 
Applicant has established payment plans which are in the process of resolving both 
debts. In October 2010, he was terminated from his employment as a federal police 
officer for excessive or unauthorized absences from work and for refusing to trim his 
beard sufficiently to enable him to wear a gas mask. Ability to wear a gas mask was a 
condition of his employment. He believed he was entitled to wear a beard because of 
his sincerely-held Muslim beliefs. He was sent home from work because of his beard. 
His violation of workplace rules is not recent; not having a beard is not a condition of his 
current employment in information technology; and additional violations of work place 
rules are unlikely to recur. Financial considerations and personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2013, Applicant signed and submitted an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1) On April 25, 2014, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
   
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make 
the affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with national 
security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On June 3, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On October 3, 2014, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On October 9, 2014, DOHA assigned 
the case to me. On December 15, 2014, DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, setting 
the hearing for January 29, 2015. (HE 1) On January 28, 2015, the hearing was 
rescheduled for February 24, 2015. (HE 1A) The hearing was held as rescheduled. 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits into evidence, and they were admitted without 
objection. (Tr. 19-20; GE 1-4) Applicant offered 17 exhibits, which were admitted without 
objection. (Tr. 21-37, 81-84; AE A-Q) I received the transcript of the hearing on March 4, 
2015. The record closed on March 5, 2015. (Tr. 97)    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted owing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and the 
underlying conduct in SOR ¶ 2.a. He denied the remaining SOR allegations. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 40 years old, and he has worked in information technology for a 
defense contractor since October 2012. (Tr. 38-39, 84) He does not intend to return to 
security-related duties. (Tr. 86) No one has expressed a concern to him about having a 
beard in his current employment in information technology. (Tr. 87) 
 
In 2000, Applicant was married, and his four children are 2, 4, 11, and 12 years 
old. (Tr. 84) He served in the Army National Guard (ANG) from 1992 to 2000, and he 
received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 85) He was a specialist (E-4) when he left the 
ANG. (Tr. 85) His military occupational specialty (MOS) was communications signal 
support. (Tr. 85)    
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s credit reports and SOR allege two debts totaling $41,198 as follows: 
(1) charged-off mortgage account for $9,635 (SOR ¶ 1.a); and (2) student loan debts for 
$31,563 (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Tr. 40) Applicant cosigned on the student loan for his cousin. (Tr. 
41)  
                                            
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s has been paying $115 monthly to address the $9,635 debt. (Tr. 68; 
AE A) His January 2015 credit report indicates the current balance on his $9,635 debt is 
$5,805. (Tr. 42-43; AE A)  
 
Applicant has been paying $300 monthly since April 2012 to address the $31,563 
debt. (Tr. 44; AE B) His January 2015 credit report shows the current balance on the 
$31,563 debt is $17,985. (Tr. 42-43, 68-69; AE A)  
 
In 2013, Applicant and his spouse’s combined income, as reflected on their 
federal income tax return, was $157,831. (Tr. 47; AE C) In 2014, their income was 
about $175,000. (Tr. 49) They use a budget and have sufficient income to pay their 
expenses. (Tr. 47) They have about $38,000 in their retirement accounts. (Tr. 50) They 
do not have any delinquent debts. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
From 2005 to October 2010, Applicant worked as a federal civilian police officer 
at a DOD base. (Tr. 39) In 2007, he injured his back, and he was unable to work for 
about six weeks. (Tr. 51) In September 2008, Applicant received a letter of reprimand 
for bringing an unauthorized laptop computer to work; however, other employees 
brought their laptop computers and other electronic media to work without being 
disciplined. (Tr. 77-78) In March 2009, his supervisor told him to remove a prayer cap 
on three occasions. Applicant refused to do so and was sent home.  
 
Applicant received doctor’s permission slips to be on sick leave for the following 
dates: September 29, 2008 to October 10, 2008; August 10, 2009 to August 15, 2009; 
and March 29, 2010 to April 5, 2010. (Tr. 53-55; AE F-I) The permission slips did not 
describe his medical problem or explain why sick leave was necessary as opposed to 
light duty. (AE F-I) He provided nine leave requests. (AE Q) Some leave requests were 
approved, and some were denied. (AE Q)  
 
In March 2009, he received a letter of caution for taking excessive leave, and he 
was advised that he was required to contact his supervisor before taking any future 
leave. (AE J) He was charged for leave without pay (LWOP) for the following dates: 8 
hours on November 4, 2008; 1.75 hours on January 6, 2009; and 7.25 hours on January 
11, 2009. (AE J) He was charged eight hours for being absent without leave (AWOL) on 
January 20, 2009, and on January 27, 2009. (AE J) On March 6, 2009, his sick leave 
balance was negative 100 hours. (AE J) Applicant said that for some of the dates he 
was authorized to be away from work. (Tr. 76) The March 2009 letter of caution 
indicated it would be maintained in his file for one year. (AE J) The letter explains that 
his “absences place a burden on management to make necessary adjustments to the 
workload necessitated” by his absence. (AE J)  
  
On March 19, 2009, Applicant filed an Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) 
complaint alleging religious discrimination. (Tr. 57; AE L) Applicant is a Muslim; he wore 
a prayer cap to work for religious reasons; and management told him to go home even 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
though he was ready, willing, and able to work. (Tr. 58) He was forced to take leave. 
(Tr. 58)  
 
On May 4, 2009, and September 21, 2009, Applicant’s representatives wrote that 
management’s proposed removal of Applicant for leave abuse was illegal because sick 
leave is an entitlement; management forced Applicant to use sick leave (when he could 
have been at work performing light duty); management was not entitled to specific 
“protected” medical information from the physician before approving a sick leave 
request; management denied some of Applicant’s leave requests without providing 
reasons for those denials, and then designated the time as AWOL; and progressive 
disciplinary actions had not been taken. (Tr. 60-63, 79-80; AE M, O) Management 
mitigated the removal to two-weeks of suspension from work without pay. (Tr. 60-61)    
 
Applicant requested religious accommodation for his beard, but not for wearing 
his prayer cap at work. (Tr. 59) On July 31, 2009, a religious organization wrote 
management on Applicant’s behalf and explained the religious significance of his beard 
and noted that under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, employers cannot 
discriminate against employees based on their religious beliefs. (AE P)  
 
In August 2009, he received a letter of requirement indicating his negative sick 
leave balance was 60 hours; he was required to contact his supervisors about absences 
from work; and his requests for sick leave lacked sufficient information to permit 
management to decide whether sick leave was warranted. (AE K) Applicant wanted to 
be placed on light duty; however, management required him to take sick leave. (Tr. 58) 
 
On November 17, 2009, management at his installation advised Applicant that 
his request to wear a beard was denied because of the requirement as a condition of 
employment that he be able to wear a gas mask, and a gas mask will not properly seal 
and be effective for someone who has a beard. (Tr. 59; AE N)2 Applicant admitted that 
he refused to shave. (Tr. 64; AE L) Applicant contended: the requirement to be able to 
wear a gas mask was not enforced for the previous four years even though he had a 
beard; the federal police at his installation were not tested for gas masks; and gas 
masks were not issued. (Tr. 76-76)  
   
In October 2010, Applicant was terminated from his employment for failing to 
provide proper documentation for taking sick leave and for failure to shave his beard. 
                                            
2 Management’s memorandum cited several Department of Defense and Navy publications. 
Current versions of those publications discuss safety, training, and medical requirements for use of gas 
masks; however, they do not discuss religious accommodations. Department of Defense (DOD) 
Instruction 2000.16 (Oct. 2, 2006), Incorporating through Change 2, (December 8, 2006), DoD 
Antiterrorism (AT) Standards; OPNAVINST 5100.23G CH-1, (July 21, 2011), Navy Safety and 
Occupational Health Program Manual; OPNAVINST 5530.14E CH-2 (September 23, 2014), Navy 
Physical Security and Law Enforcement Program. OPNAVINST 5100.23G, subsection 1503(e) provides: 
e. Per reference 15-3, “The employer shall not permit respirators with tight-fitting facepieces [of gas 
masks] to be worn by employees who have: (1) Facial hair that comes between the sealing surface of the 
facepiece and the face or that interferes with valve function; or (2) Any condition that interferes with the 
face-to-facepiece seal or valve function.” Applicant’s federal civilian police officer job description, as a first 
responder in the event of an emergency, requires that he be able to wear a gas mask. (AE L) 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(Tr. 64) Applicant is in settlement negotiations on his EEOC complaint, which centers on 
management’s failure to accommodate his religious belief that he should be entitled to 
have a beard. (Tr. 65) See note 5, infra. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided 10 statements from coworkers, friends, and supervisors, who 
have known him for periods ranging from a few months to ten years. (AE E) The letters 
laud his initiative, conscientiousness, intelligence, excellent written and verbal skills, 
professionalism, knowledge, diligence, dependability, dedication, trustworthiness, and 
contributions to mission accomplishment. (AE E) Their statements support 
reinstatement of his security clearance. (AE E) A major, who worked at the installation 
where Applicant was a federal police officer and supervised him, described him as an 
asset to any employer and positively depicted his organization, communication skills, 
and effectiveness. (AE E)    
            
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. Applicant’s SOR alleges two debts 
totaling $41,198. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). The SOR contains two debts, 
and Applicant has established payment plans addressing each debt. He reduced the 
two debts from a total of $41,198 to $23,790 by making $415 monthly payments for 
several years.  Both debts are in current status.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(d) apply. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took 
reasonable actions to resolve his SOR debts. There are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved and is under control. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  .  .  .  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations.  
 
When Applicant was a federal police officer, he brought an unauthorized laptop to 
work; he failed to comply with his supervisor’s request for additional information to 
support his sick leave requests; and he failed to comply with his supervisor’s directive 
that he needed to shave his beard. Assuming there is no possible accommodation for 
wearing a gas mask and having a beard (such as modifying his gas mask), his 
supervisor’s requests are supported by federal law and were not illegal or improper 
requirements.4 His supervisor explained to Applicant that he needed to shave his beard 
so that he could wear a gas mask. His supervisor provided the references to ensure 
Applicant understood the requirement for him to be able to wear a gas mask.5 When 
                                            
4 See 5 CFR § 630.405(b) (“An employee must provide administratively acceptable evidence or 
medical certification for a request for sick leave no later than 15 calendar days after the date the agency 
requests such medical certification. If it is not practicable under the particular circumstances to provide 
the requested evidence or medical certification within 15 calendar days after the date requested by the 
agency despite the employee's diligent, good faith efforts, the employee must provide the evidence or 
medical certification within a reasonable period of time under the circumstances involved, but no later 
than 30 calendar days after the date the agency requests such documentation. An employee who does 
not provide the required evidence or medical certification within the specified time period is not entitled to 
sick leave.”). See also Pierre v. Napolitano, 958 F. Supp. 2d 461, 479 (S.D. N.Y. 2013) (management 
entitled to request additional information about illness to support sick leave request); New-Howard v. VA, 
590 Fed. Appx. 972, 2014 U.S. App. LEXIS 21402 (Fed. Cir. 2014)(same)(nonprecedential dec.).    
 
5 The EEOC website provides two examples addressing wearing a beard and religious 
accommodation. 
 
EXAMPLE 15, Facial Hair 
 
Prakash, who works for CutX, a surgical instrument manufacturer, does not shave or trim 
his facial hair because of his Sikh religious observance. When he seeks a promotion to 
manage the division responsible for sterilizing instruments, his employer tells him that he 
must shave or trim his beard because it may contaminate the sterile field. All division 
employees are required to be clean shaven and wear a face mask. When Prakash 
explains that he does not trim his beard for religious reasons, the employer offers to allow 
Prakash to wear two face masks instead of trimming his beard. Prakash thinks that 
wearing two masks is unreasonable and files a Title VII charge. CutX will prevail because 
it offered a reasonable accommodation that would eliminate Prakash's religious conflict 
with the hygiene rule. EEOC Compliance Manual on Religious Discrimination (2008) at 
Example 46; EEOC v. United Parcel Service, 94 F.3d 314 (7th Cir. 1996) (genuine issue 
of material fact regarding whether the employer reasonably accommodated the 
employee's religious practice of wearing a beard precluded summary judgment for the 
employer). 
 
EXAMPLE 16, Facial Hair 
 
Raj, a Sikh, interviews for an office job. At the end of the interview, he receives a job offer 
but is told he will have to shave his beard because all office staff are required to be 
"clean shaven" to promote discipline. Raj advises the hiring manager that he wears his 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant declined to shave his beard; he was sent home; and his absence was 
designated as AWOL. He was first placed on LWOP for two weeks and then terminated. 
There is sufficient evidence of rule violations to establish AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d), and 
consideration of mitigating conditions is required. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case 
are as follows: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
In September 2008, Applicant received a letter of reprimand for bringing an 
unauthorized laptop computer to work. This rule violation did not recur. There is no 
evidence that his laptop was used to violate security.  
 
Assuming management was not required or unable to accommodate Applicant’s 
religious desire to have a beard, Applicant violated rules when he refused to shave. He 
failed to provide sufficient medical information for his supervisor to decide whether he 
needed sick leave. Applicant received legal advice from the base labor committee which 
supports his position that management’s requirements were illegal. However, the 
lawyer’s letter on behalf of the base labor committee failed to address contrary legal 
authority, and Applicant is not a lawyer.      
 
Applicant had a good-faith belief that his supervisors violated his rights by 
insisting on additional medical information, and by requiring him to shave his beard to 
enable him to wear a gas mask to perform his police duties in the event of a gas attack. 
He openly and lawfully challenged the legality of his supervisor’s orders through the 
EEO system. There is no evidence that he has violated employment rules since 2010. 
Assuming management complied with EEO requirements, his rule violations are not 
recent, and they occurred “under such unique circumstances” that they are “unlikely to 
recur” and do “not cast doubt on [his] reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He 
no longer works as a federal police officer; his present employment in information 
technology can accommodate his desire to have a beard at work; and he is not required 
                                                                                                                                            
beard unshorn because of his Sikh religious practice. Since no undue hardship is posed 
by allowing Raj to wear his beard, the employer must make an exception as an 
accommodation. EEOC v. United Parcel Service, Civil Action No. 08-cv-1806 (M.D. Pa. 
consent decree entered Feb. 2010) (settling Title VII claim of failure to accommodate 
package delivery employee whose religious practice of wearing long hair and beard 
necessitated exception to company's grooming code). 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to be able to perform the strenuous physical duties of a police officer and excessive use 
of sick leave has not been a problem for him. His current employment has enabled him 
“to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG 
¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply, and personal conduct concerns are mitigated.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old, and he has worked in information technology for a 
defense contractor since October 2012. He served in the ANG from 1992 to 2000; he 
received an honorable discharge; he was a specialist when he left the ANG; and his 
MOS was communications signal support. He is sufficiently mature to understand and 
comply with his security responsibilities. He deserves substantial credit for volunteering 
to support the U.S. Government as an employee of a contractor and for his ANG 
service. Applicant provided 10 statements from coworkers, friends, and supervisors. His 
character references laud his initiative, conscientiousness, intelligence, excellent written 
and verbal skills, professionalism, knowledge, diligence, dependability, dedication, 
trustworthiness, and contributions to mission accomplishment. There is every indication 
that he is loyal to the United States and his employer.  
 
In September 2008, Applicant violated a rule when he brought an unauthorized 
laptop computer to work. From 2009 to 2010, Applicant violated rules when he failed to 
provide sufficient medical information for his supervisor to decide whether he needed 
sick leave. Assuming management was not required to accommodate his religious 
belief that he should have a beard, he violated a rule when he refused to shave 
because he was unable to safely wear a gas mask in the event of a gas attack. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant received legal advice from the base labor committee which supports his 
position that the requirement to shave and to provide more specific information about 
his illness and prognosis was unlawful. Applicant had a good-faith belief that his 
supervisors violated his rights by insisting on additional medical information, and that he 
needed to shave his beard to enable him to wear a gas mask to perform his duties. He 
openly and lawfully challenged the legality of his supervisor’s orders through the EEO 
system. Applicant has not violated any work-place rules since October 2010. His rule 
violations are not recent. Since October 2012, he has worked in information technology 
for a defense contractor without incident. All of his problems as a federal police officer 
relate to performing physical requirements and his beard and wearing his prayer cap. 
Those unique circumstances are unlikely to recur in the information technology 
environment.       
 
Applicant is credited with bringing both of his delinquent debts to current status. 
His credit reports establish that he has kept numerous debts in current status or 
resolved them through payment. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will continue to pay his debts and 
maintain his financial responsibility.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations and personal 
conduct concerns are mitigated.   
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
