 
1 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04654 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. In 2009, Applicant 
used cocaine. She has mitigated the illegal drug security concerns. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 6, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On November 19, 2014, Applicant answered 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
the SOR and requested a hearing. On January 28, 2015, I was assigned the case. On 
February 28, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on February 11, 2015. I admitted 
Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 3, without objection. Applicant testified at the 
hearing as did her spouse. On February 20, 2015, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted using cocaine in September and 
October 2009. Her admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old aircraft mechanic who has worked for a defense 
contractor since August 2010, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. She currently 
has confidential-level access. Applicant produced no work or character references.  
 
 From July 1981 through July 1985, Applicant honorably served in the U.S. Navy. 
At time of discharge, she was an E-4. (Tr. 17) From 1985 until 1999, she was employed 
by a DoD contractor working on aircraft at the same location where she had been 
stationed in the Navy and where she now works. (Tr. 18) She was away from the base 
for ten years when laid off from her DoD contractor’s job. (Tr. 18) From July 1999 
through November 2009, Applicant worked at an oil refinery. In November 2009, she 
was fired when she failed a random hair follicle drug test. (Ex. 1, 3, Tr. 14, 27) She has 
not used illegal drugs since leaving the refinery. (Tr. 26) She listed her illegal drug 
usage on her January 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP). (Ex. 1)  
 
 Applicant was questioned about her drug use during a February 2014 Enhanced 
Subject Interview. (Ex. 3) At that time, she indicated she had used cocaine on two 
occasions in 2009. (Ex. 3, Tr. 20) She indicated, at the time of her use, she was 
socializing with the wrong crowd and used the drug to fit in. She used it at a party with 
coworkers from the refinery. (Tr. 21) She no longer socializes with these people and has 
not seen them since she left the refinery in 2009. (Ex. 3)  
 
 Applicant acknowledged it was “stupid” for her to use cocaine, and stated she: 
 
was hanging around with the wrong people, different place, different time. 
I didn’t like where I was at that time. I was working – I didn’t like my job; I 
didn’t like what [I] was doing. I was hanging around with the wrong people. 
And, you know, it’s something that’s never going to happen again. (Tr. 21-
22)  
 
 At the refinery, Applicant would work seven days on day shift and then seven 
days on night shift. She would work three or four months without a day off. (Tr. 24) 
Applicant loves her job now doing what she did when she was in the Navy. (Tr. 22) She 
 
3 
 
 
is working with old friends at the base. (Tr. 24) She married a few months before the 
hearing, having been together 17 years. (Tr. 32) Three or four year ago they purchased 
their home after renting the home for years. They volunteer at an animal rescue and 
adopted a class of special-needs children. (Tr. 23) She also volunteers welcoming 
veterans back home. (Tr. 24)  
 
Applicant is subject to random drug testing at her current job. (Tr. 28) Her last 
urinalysis occurred six month ago, which was related to safety at the job site. (Tr. 28) 
She no longer associates with individuals using illegal drugs. (Tr. 31) She does not 
hang out with negative people, and her home is a clean, drug-free environment. (Tr. 33)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement in that 
the use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use. 
 
In 2009, Applicant’s use of cocaine was discovered by a positive drug test. AG ¶ 
25(a) and AG ¶ 25(b) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence. 
 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
 
5 
 
 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists ways Applicant can demonstrate her intent not to abuse illegal 
drugs in the future. She has disassociated from her drug-using associates and contacts. 
She does not routinely return to locations where she abused illegal drugs, and has 
changed or avoided the environment where drugs were used. She has changed her life, 
and has not routinely associated with the drug-abusing coworkers from her past. She 
has abstained from drug abuse for more than five years. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended her drug abuse in October 2009. The motivations 
to stop using drugs are evident.3 She understands the adverse results from drug abuse. 
She has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no drug abuse to eliminate 
drug involvement as a bar to her access to classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence 
of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively 
emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave 
too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy.  
 
3Retention of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse health, 
employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for remaining 
drug free. 
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is considerable evidence 
supporting approval of her clearance. Applicant revealed her drug abuse on her January 
2014 security clearance application, to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator in February 2014, and at her hearing. Applicant used illegal drugs twice in 
2009. She does not associate with the drug-using coworkers from her previous job. Now 
that she has a job she really enjoys and treasures, the consequences of drug abuse will 
be much more severe. She stopped using illegal drugs more than five years ago. She 
knows the consequences if she resumes her drug usage. There is no evidence at her 
current employment of any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or 
that she would intentionally violate national security. Her civil involvement shows 
responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. I am satisfied that her current judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and her current ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations show solid potential for access to classified information.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her previous illegal drug 
usage. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
