 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended. See also Directive, Section E3.1.1.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-02209
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by the presence of his family
members in India. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 25, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) could not determine
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to
classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered3
in support of the Government’s case. Item 7 is an administrative notice request supported by 14 documents
(Enclosures I - XIV)
2
On August 29, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a2
hearing. On November 13, 2014, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on December 9,3
2014, and was notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. However,
he did not submit any additional information. The record closed on January 8, 2015, and
the case was assigned to me on January 30, 2015.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged that Applicant’s mother (SOR 1.a), father (SOR 1.b),
sister (SOR 1.c) and two brothers-in-law (SOR 1.d) are citizens of India and reside in
India. Applicant admitted these allegations, and provided additional information as part
of his response. In addition to his admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 45 years old. He was born and raised in India. In 1992, he received a
bachelor of science degree in India and began working in the information technology
(IT) industry there. In 1998, at age 29, he immigrated to the United States on a
temporary work visa. Through employment in the United States, he obtained permanent
resident alien status, and he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2005. (Gx.
1; FORM, Items 4 - 6)
Applicant has worked for U.S. defense contractors in various IT positions since
1998. Most of his career has been spent working at the same DOD facility. In 2011,
Applicant was granted eligibility for a position of trust (ADP II) in connection with his
employment. Applicant has been with his current employer since October 2013, but a
previous employer supporting the same DOD program sponsored his clearance
request. (FORM, Items 4 - 6)
Applicant and his wife have been married since January 2000. She also is a
native of India and a naturalized U.S. citizen. They have two children, ages 11 and 8,
who were born in the United States. All of Applicant’s personal, professional and
financial interests are in the United States. He and his wife first bought a house in 2003.
In 2005, they moved and bought another house. Applicant has lived continuously in the
United States since 1998. (FORM, Items and 5)
Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of India. He is a retired employee of
the education department in the Indian state where he lives. Applicant’s father draws a
pension from the state government. Applicant’s mother is a housewife.
 In addition to the information contained in FORM Item 7 and its supporting documents, I have, sua sponte,4
consulted other sources, such as the CIA Factbook web pages regarding India. 
3
Applicant has a sister and a brother. His brother lives in the United States and is
a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of India. She is a
housewife who does not work outside the home. Her husband is a citizen and resident
of India working as a senior bank manager. Applicant’s wife’s brother is a citizen and
resident of India working in an IT firm there. (FORM, Items 4 - 6)
None of Applicant’s family are employed by or associated with the government of
India. Applicant’s parents do not use email, and he speaks with his father each week by
telephone. Applicant also speaks with his sister and her husband by telephone each
week. His contact with his wife’s brother occurs when she calls her brother each week.
Applicant has also traveled to India to see his family about seven times since 2005.
Each visit lasts about one month. Applicant has not encountered any difficulties
traveling to or from India on those visits, and he has not established any new lasting
contacts there during his trips. (FORM, Items 4 - 6)
Based on the information  presented in support of the Government’s4
administrative notice request, I make the following findings of fact:
India and the U.S. have had close relations ever since India obtained its
independence from Great Britain in 1947. The two governments continue to work
closely in pursuit of mutual interests in such issues as international management of
nuclear technology, preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the global war
on terror. Because India is important to strategic U.S. interests in the region, the two
countries have also engaged in several joint military exercises to ensure stability in
southern and southwest Asia. The Indian government buys most of its nuclear
technology from the U.S., and it has an excellent record when it comes to protecting its
nuclear arsenal.
Since the end of the Cold War, India has been an advocate of issues important to
non-aligned nations, and is a member of the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC). Not only does India enjoy close relations with the U.S., but it is
working to strengthen its ties and advance its mutual interests with France, Israel,
China, Iran, the European Union, Japan, and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).
India’s human rights record is uneven. Throughout its history, India’s caste
system, multi-cultural and multi-ethnic population, and the vestiges of colonial
domination have challenged India’s ability to govern certain parts of the country. As a
result of sometimes violent separatist movements, provincial law enforcement
authorities and military militias have used excessive force to maintain order and defeat
domestic terrorism. Although terrorism and separatist activities are generally done in
furtherance of internal issues, and are most violent in limited and remote geographic
regions, the developing presence of international terrorist organizations is a growing
 Directive, 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
4
concern. Despite these problems, India is still an open society in which the rule of law is
prominent.
India, the world’s most populous democracy, uses a federal form of government,
similar to the United States, but with more authority vested in the central government. It
has a bicameral legislature modeled after Britain’s parliament, and its members are
selected through open elections involving several political parties. India also has an
active market-oriented economy, and conducts most of its international trade with the
U.S. India is included, along with other countries with whom the U.S. has good relations,
on the U.S. State Department’s list of the most active collectors of industrial information
and technology.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it7
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
5
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to9
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Foreign Influence
Applicant’s parents, sister, and two brothers-in-law are citizens and residents of
India. By definition, these are persons to whom Applicant is closely bound by affection.
This is further manifested in Applicant’s frequent phone contact with his family and by
frequent travel for visits with his family. Because India is known to aggressively pursue
economic and technology information from the United States, and owing to the
presence of domestic terrorism there, these relationships reasonably raise security
concerns about foreign influence. That concern is articulated at AG ¶ 6, as follows:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
More specifically, the record requires application of the following disqualifying
conditions under AG ¶ 7:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
6
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
By contrast, the record also requires application of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; and
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.
None of Applicant’s family are associated with the government of India. At most,
his father’s pension benefits represent a government connection; however, that benefit
does not derive from India’s central government and does not involve any active
participation or interaction with the government by his father. As such, it has little, if any,
security significance. 
It is reasonable to conclude that there is a heightened risk of pressure by foreign
entities when a person has relatives living abroad. However, in this case that risk is
greatly attenuated by the open nature of India’s society, and by the long-standing close
ties between the United States and India. Further, Applicant has firmly established a life
in this country. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and his children are U.S. citizens
by birth. Applicant’s entire personal and professional life is in the United States. And
while the Government is never estopped from re-evaluating a person’s suitability for
access to classified information, it must be taken into account that Applicant has been
working in support of the U.S. military through a position of trust involving sensitive
information since 2011. Eligibility for such access, presumably, was based on a positive
adjudication of the same information presented in this case. The record as a whole
supports a reasonable conclusion that Applicant can be relied on to resolve any
conflicting interests consistent with the expectations associated with his access to
classified information. I conclude the security concerns raised by the Government’s
information have been mitigated. 
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline B, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). A fair and commonsense
assessment of all available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information supports a conclusion in favor of the Applicant.
Formal Findings
7
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
