 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03297 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines H 
(drug involvement) and E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines H and E. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD CAF could not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
On August 25, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have a decision 
based on the administrative record in lieu of a hearing. On February 4, 2015, 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5. A complete copy of the FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on February 19, 2015, and he received it on February 27, 2015. He was given 
30 days from its receipt to file objections or submit matters in refutation, mitigation, or 
extenuation. On March 9, 2015, he provided a response to the FORM that has been 
marked as Item 6. Applicant raised no objections to Items 1 through 5. Department 
Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s response to the FORM. The case was assigned 
to me on March 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2011. He graduated from high school in 2002 and 
earned an associate’s degree in 2012. He is divorced and has no children. He was 
granted a SECRET security clearance in June 2003.1 
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force (USAF) as an enlisted 
member from February 2003 to October 2011. In October 2011, he was awarded 
nonjudicial punishment (i.e., “Article 15”) for a drug offense. In his Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated April 25, 2013, he disclosed 
that he was discharged from the USAF for misconduct due to a “[o]ne time Marijuana 
usage incident.” He provided varying information in his e-QIP about the characterization 
of his discharge. In one e-QIP entry, he indicated that he was discharged under 
honorable conditions and in another entry he indicated “Discharge Detail Other than 
Honorable.”2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he used marijuana in about 
April 2011 while holding a security clearance. He also stated: 
 
I have been honest and forthcoming about this since the beginning, 
cooperating with AFOSI [Air Force Office of Special Investigations], my 
Chain of Command, and all required parties. I acknowledge my mistake 
and do regret it, but have learned from it greatly. I went to ADAPT (Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Prevention and Treatment) voluntarily, through the Air 
Force, and [I] was determined to not have any issues, or problems with 
alcohol, or drugs (prescription, or illegal) by the ADAPT personnel.3 
 
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a Statement of Intent that he 
would not abuse any drugs in the future. He described his previous use of marijuana as 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
2 Item 4. 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
a one-time lapse in judgment. He also stated that no one in his life is involved in drug 
usage. He is ashamed of his misconduct and accepts responsibility for it.4   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
4 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and find the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
In about April 2011, Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 26. The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
 
5 
 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(c) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana on active duty while holding a security clearance 
was a significant disregard of the law and a breach of a position of trust. He was 
punished and discharged from the military for that offense. He stated that he 
participated in the ADAPT program and was determined to have no drug problem. He 
submitted a Statement of Intent to not use drugs again and indicated he does not 
associate with drug users. No prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional was 
presented. Based on the record evidence, I am unable to find that his drug abuse 
happened under unusual circumstances, is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find that insufficient time has  
passed to conclude that he has put his drug abuse behind him. In making that finding, I 
note that I did not have the opportunity to observe his demeanor or assess his 
credibility. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) partially apply, but do not mitigate the Guideline H 
security concerns. AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
Applicant used marijuana while possessing a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(e) 
applies. 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
For the reasons discussed under Guideline H, I find that none of the above 
mitigating conditions fully apply to the Guideline E allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant was punished and discharged from the military due to a drug 
offense. He failed to provide sufficient whole-person evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from such misconduct. Applicant’s disregard for the law raises doubts 
about his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all the above reasons, I 
 
7 
 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
