 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03334 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nicole Pruss, PhD, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his past marijuana use and 
employment termination after revealing his past drug use on a security clearance 
application. Over five years have passed since Applicant last used marijuana. In the 
intervening years, he has established a track record of responsible behavior, leading to 
a conclusion that his past security-significant conduct is unlikely to be repeated. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging that his past conduct raised security concerns 
under the drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines.1 On April 14, 2015, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to re-establish his eligibility for 
access to classified information. (Answer)  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On July 31, 2015, Department Counsel indicated that the Government was ready 
to proceed to hearing. I was assigned the case on August 31, 2015, and after conferring 
with the parties, scheduled the hearing for September 29, 2015. The hearing was 
rescheduled, with the agreement of the parties, for October 6, 2015.2 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits (Ex. 1 – 3). Applicant 
testified and post-hearing submitted two exhibits (Ex. A – B).3 All exhibits were admitted 
into the record without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on October 
14, 2015, and the record closed on October 23, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 35, is divorced with no children. His employment history primarily 
reflects work as a security guard. Currently, he is a supervisor for a private security for a 
large retail shopping mall. He manages about 60 security guards and works 
approximately 70 hours per week. He is also pursuing an undergraduate degree and, as 
of the hearing, was a few credits shy of receiving a degree in criminal justice. 
 
In 2007, Applicant was working as a federal contractor when, on short notice, he 
was asked to deploy overseas in support of a U.S. Government (USG) program. 
Applicant accepted the year-long overseas assignment and deployed. He was first 
granted a security clearance in connection with this deployment. Upon Applicant’s 
return to the United States, his efforts on behalf of the USG were recognized by another 
government agency. He was then hired as a federal contractor for the other agency.  
 
 Applicant acknowledges he used marijuana on two occasions while working as a 
federal contractor and after being granted a security clearance. In 2008, shortly after 
returning to the United States from the overseas deployment, Applicant was at a social 
gathering when a marijuana cigarette was passed around. He took “two drags” from the 
cigarette. He again used marijuana in 2010, when he was at another social function and 
smoked from a hookah. After inhaling, Applicant realized that the hookah contained 
marijuana and did not use the hookah again. (Tr. at 41; Ex. 3)  
 
 Applicant disclosed his marijuana use on his 2012 security clearance application 
(SCA). (Ex. 1 at 31) He received a reprimand from his former employer for failing to 
report the drug use upon being hired. Applicant’s former employer cited the reprimand 
and multiple incidents of being late to work as a basis for his discharge in June 2012.  
 
 Applicant acknowledges he exercised poor judgment in using marijuana while 
holding a security clearance and the conduct that led to his job termination. He no 
longer associates with those he used marijuana with in the past. He submitted a signed 
statement reflecting his intent not to use marijuana or any illegal drugs in the future, and 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, scheduling correspondence and notice of hearing. See also, Hx. II, 
documents establishing that, at the time of the hearing, Applicant was being sponsored for a clearance. 
 
3 Hx. III, Department Counsel acknowledges receipt of Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits and notes that 
the Government has no objection to their admission. 
 
3 
 
further declared that if he violated his written promise the DOD could “permanently deny 
me any type of security clearance for life.” (Ex. B) Since 2010, Applicant has voluntarily 
submitted to workplace drug screens, including random drug screens, and passed them 
all. He is regularly on time for his job. His exemplary work performance resulted in his 
promotion to his current supervisory position.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement by a current or a 
prospective clearance holder is explained at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s past marijuana use raises the drug involvement concern and the 
following disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse; and  
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use qualifies as “drug abuse,” as defined by the Directive.4 
Furthermore, his marijuana use in 2008 and 2010, although limited, took place after he 
was granted a security clearance.5 Accordingly, both disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred more than five years ago. Since then, 
he has taken and passed several drug screens and stopped associating with drug-using 
individuals. He returned to school and is on the verge of attaining his undergraduate 
degree. He has also amassed a good employment record at his current place of 
employment. Furthermore, he credibly testified that he would not use marijuana or other 
illegal drugs in the future and submitted a signed, sworn statement that fully reflects his 
testimony. In short, both through his words and actions, Applicant established the 
following drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; [or] (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
                                                          
4 The Directive defines “drug abuse” as the “illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” See AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
5 I have considered that Applicant’s 2010 use was unknowing and he did not use from the hookah again 
after he became aware it contained marijuana. However, the Directive does not require proof that the 
individual’s drug use was knowing before it can be considered potentially disqualifying. 
 
5 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s past marijuana use and 2012 employment termination raised 
concerns about his judgment, honesty, and reliability. See AG ¶ 16(c). However, these 
concerns were mitigated for the reasons explained under the drug involvement 
guideline. In addition, Applicant’s failure to reveal his past drug use to his former 
employer when initially hired was mitigated by his subsequent voluntary disclosure of 
this adverse information on the SCA and his candor discussing the matter during the 
security clearance background investigation. See AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I incorporate my drug involvement and personal 
conduct analysis herein and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant’s past drug use and dishonesty when hired by his former employer 
raised legitimate concerns about his eligibility for access to classified information. 
Moreover, although his past marijuana use was of limited scope and duration, it 
occurred after he was granted a security clearance, raising heightened security 
concerns. In light of this heightened security concern, the passage of time alone, 
without evidence of true reform and rehabilitation, would be insufficient to overcome the 
doubts raised about his eligibility.  
 
 Applicant met his high burden of persuasion. In the time that has passed since 
the security-significant conduct at issue, he has demonstrated true reform. He stopped 
socializing and associating with former friends who were involved with illegal drugs. He 
established a good employment record, leading to a promotion to his current position as 
a supervisor. On average, he works about 70 hours per week and is on track to earn his 
undergraduate degree. In short, Applicant has a demonstrated track record of 
                                                          
6 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
responsible behavior, to include abstaining from any involvement with illegal drugs over 
the past five years.  
 
 In addition to this good track record, Applicant’s honesty in revealing the adverse 
information at issue stands as a testament to his trustworthiness. He continued to be 
fully candid about his past conduct during the ensuing security clearance investigation 
and at hearing. Applicant’s honesty further demonstrates rehabilitation on his part and 
the lack of any potential for coercion from his past conduct. Therefore, I find that 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his past conduct.  
 
 A security clearance determination is not intended to punish a person for past 
conduct. Rather, an administrative judge examines a person’s past conduct for it is 
generally the best indicator of an individual’s potential future behavior.7 Here, Applicant 
mitigated the concerns raised by his past conduct by demonstrating that he is no longer 
the individual who engaged in the questionable conduct giving rise to the SOR. Instead, 
for the past five years, Applicant has handled and conducted his affairs in a responsible 
fashion. This favorable track record, coupled with Applicant honesty during the security 
clearance process, remove any doubt about his current and future ability to handle and 
safeguard classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s present eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)   APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an 
exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that 
person's past conduct and present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529).  
