 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01588 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 26, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant. The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
  
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with national security to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
On July 21, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. At that time, Applicant 
requested that a determination be made without a hearing. However, on October 22, 
2014, Applicant requested a hearing. On December 16, 2014, Department Counsel 
indicated he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On January 14, 2015, the case 
was assigned to me. On January 23, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the 
hearing for February 11, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant did not call any witnesses, but did testify on 
his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 24, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. After a 
thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Preliminary Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.c. Without objection from the 
Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 9-10.) 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old field aerospace technician, who has been employed by 
a defense contractor since September 1985. He seeks to retain his secret security 
clearance, which is a condition of his continued employment. Applicant has successfully 
held a clearance since 1995. On February 9, 2015, he was suspended and placed on 
unpaid administrative leave while he awaits the results of this hearing. (GE 1; Tr. 23, 25-
28, 31-33, 56-59.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1983. In the 1994 to 1995 
timeframe, he attended community college and is three classes short of earning an 
associate’s degree. (GE 4, Tr. 23-24.) 
 
Applicant’s marriage from September 1986 to October 2001 ended by divorce. 
He has three adult children from his marriage. Applicant has not remarried. (GE 1, Tr. 
29-31.) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant’s problems with alcohol stem from two separate alcohol-related arrests. 
The first arrest occurred in February 2006. On the evening of this arrest, Applicant was 
 
3 
 
 
having dinner with a female friend. Applicant acknowledged consuming more alcohol 
than he should have, and that he “made the foolish decision to drive home after [he] had 
been drinking and that’s when [he] got pulled over.” (SOR ¶ 1.d; SOR answer; Tr. 33-
35.) Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI) and resisting arrest. In 
July 2007, he pled guilty to misdemeanor DUI and was sentenced to 90 days 
suspended license, 50 hours of community service, fined approximately $771, and 
ordered to complete an alcohol awareness class. On July 13, 2006, and before final 
disposition of his case, Applicant was placed on supervised probation for 12 months. He 
satisfactorily completed his probation on May 10, 2007. Applicant did not receive an 
adverse alcohol diagnosis following this incident, and fully complied with his July 2007 
sentence. (SOR ¶ 1.d; SOR answer; GE 1 – GE 6; Tr. 35-44, 72.) The terms of 
Applicant’s one year of probation from July 2007 to July 2008 precluded him from 
consuming any alcohol. (Tr. 54.) 
 
Applicant’s second alcohol-related arrest occurred in July 2012. On the evening 
of this arrest, Applicant was having dinner and drinks alone. According to the police 
report, a police officer observed Applicant’s car swerving while he was on the way 
home. Applicant acknowledged that he had been drinking. He was charged with the 
amended charge of a second offense of DUI, refusing to take a DUI test, and having an 
open container. He pled no contest to the lesser offense of reckless driving and refusing 
to take a DUI test. Applicant was sentenced to two days in jail, but received credit for 
time served, supervised probation for 11 months and 20 days, driver’s license was 
revoked for 18 months, pay approximately $2,389 in fines, and ordered to attend DUI 
school and a victim awareness program, undergo a substance abuse evaluation, and 
perform 75 hours of community service. Applicant underwent an alcohol assessment 
and like the previous 2007 assessment, he did not receive an adverse alcohol 
diagnosis. (SOR ¶ 1.b; SOR answer; GE 1-5, GE 7; Tr. 44-54, 72.) Applicant completed 
his probation in July 2014. (Tr. 61.) 
 
During Applicant’s recent probation, he was required to take random drug tests. 
He produced documentation that all of his tests were negative. (Tr. 55-56, AE A, AE B.) 
Applicant did not offer any excuses for his second alcohol-related offense. He stated 
that he had broken up with his girlfriend and was feeling sorry for himself and what he 
did was “extremely stupid,” and that he exercised “extremely bad judgment.” (Tr. 60.) 
Applicant testified that he is not a heavy drinker and that he does not drink to excess 
adding that his mother said he always learned things the hard way. (Tr. 61.)  
 
Since completing his probation in July 2014, Applicant stated that the only 
alcohol he consumed was a glass of wine with Christmas dinner in 2014. (Tr. 62.) 
Applicant’s moderate alcohol consumption is consistent with the information he provided 
during his November 2013 Office of Personal Management Personal Subject Interview 
(OPM PSI). (GE 4.) Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a that he consumed alcohol at times to 
excess and to the point of intoxication from 1979 to 2012. The Government’s evidence 
did not substantiate this allegation nor did it rebut Applicant’s denial. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant stated that he did not receive any formal counseling from his employer 
after his second alcohol-related offense. However, he did receive informal counseling 
from human resources and his senior managers and “got chewed pretty good.” (Tr. 62.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant has received several work-related awards and certificates, as well as 
certificates for completion of programs following his second alcohol-related offense: (1) 
two specific-timely-achievement-recognition-system awards in October 2011 and June 
2014; (2) a certificate of appreciation; (3) a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives permit to transport, ship, receive, or possess explosive materials in the 
performance of his duties in July 2012; (4) a certificate of completion for driver safety 
course in December 2013; (5) a certification of completion for the Victim Awareness 
Program in August 2013; (6) a certificate of achievement for successful completion of 
15 substance abuse treatment sessions in December 2013; and (7) a certificate of 
successful completion for a Level II DUI and substance abuse program in September 
2013. (Tr. 63-69; AE A – AE D.) 
 
Applicant purchased a new home in April 2014 and spends most of his 
discretionary free time working on the house. Currently, his middle daughter lives with 
him. Applicant likes to play pool and softball when he is not working on his house. (Tr. 
70-72.) 
 
Having observed Applicant’s demeanor, I found his testimony to be credible. At 
his hearing, Applicant promptly answered all the questions asked. He was frank, candid, 
and forthcoming in his answers and explained his answers without hesitation. He readily 
admitted his lapses in judgment in having been arrested for two alcohol-related 
offenses.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
 
5 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
 
6 
 
 
The Government established its case, in part, under Guideline G through 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. Applicant had two alcohol-related 
arrests in 2006 and 2012. However, as noted, his 2006 arrest resulted in him being 
convicted of misdemeanor DUI and his 2012 arrest resulted in him being convicted of 
reckless driving.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of one alcohol consumption 
disqualifying condition, AG ¶ 22(a) “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence,” applies as a result of Applicant’s 2006 and 2012 
alcohol-related arrests. Applicant successfully refuted the underlying facts that gave rise 
to his consuming alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from 1979 
to 2012. Accordingly, no further discussion is warranted for SOR ¶ 1.a.   
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of two 
alcohol consumption mitigating conditions is appropriate with regard to Applicant’s 2006 
and 2012 DUI offenses: 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 AG ¶ 23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program; apply. 
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his 2006 and 
2012 alcohol-related arrests, has established that he is not alcohol dependent, and 
during the infrequent times he consumes alcohol, he does so responsibly. He is 
remorseful for his behavior and has initiated changes in his lifestyle. His work 
performance, certificates of achievement, and awards show Applicant’s work behavior 
has not been indicative of his having an alcohol problem. He is a valuable employee, 
who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His sobriety and responsible use of 
alcohol is supported by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his 
hearing, Applicant acknowledged the problems misuse of alcohol has caused him, 
demonstrated remorse, and a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes 
consistent with responsible use of alcohol. 
 
  
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guideline G is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However further comments are warranted. 
 
I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s demeanor during his hearing and 
the apparent effect this process has had on him. Applicant has been willing to do 
whatever is necessary to recover from his alcohol-related arrests. The process has 
been costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and professionally. 
Applicant has dedicated the majority of his adult working life, 20 years, to the defense 
industry. He attained a level of trust within his company in which he is allowed among 
other things to transport, ship, receive, or possess explosive materials. He 
demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to responsible alcohol consumption.  
 
Also noteworthy is Applicant’s past behavior, which serves as a reliable indicator 
of future behavior. In particular, he has successfully held a security clearance for the 
past ten years. He has been cooperative throughout this process and recognizes the 
gravity of these proceedings. He recently took on the responsibilities of becoming a new 
home owner, is an involved father with his three children, a responsible and contributing 
citizen, and a valued and trusted employee. In sum, I find Applicant has presented 
sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
 
8 
 
 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
