                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12–09886
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 22, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated March 3, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 12, 2016, the Department of
Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
“Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 13, 2016, and she requested a hearing
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge.  This case was
assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 3, 2016.  A notice of hearing was
issued on November 3, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 7, 2016.  At the
hearing the Government presented six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 6.  The Applicant presented three exhibits, which were admitted without
objection, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C.  The record remained open
until close of business on December 30, 2016, to allow the Applicant to submit
supporting additional documentation.  Applicant submitted three Post-Hearing Exhibits,
referred to as Applicants Exhibits D through F, which were admitted without objection. 
These exhibits include fourteen letters of recommendation from neighbors, coworkers
and managers, as well as a letter of designation for the confined space program, and an
entry permit, a total of sixteen separate documents.  The official transcript (Tr.) was
received on December 16, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 54 years old and is divorced with one adult son.  She has a high
school diploma.  She is employed by a defense contractor as a Structural Aircraft
Mechanic and a security clearance is necessary in connection with her employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because she has engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.  
Applicant denied each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  The
Government contends in the SOR that the Applicant has a history of using questionable
judgment at work, evidenced by the number of written warnings and job terminations
she has had in the past.  Applicant believes that for the most part, her problems are
because she works in a male dominated field.  As a female she makes up only 1
percent of the work force, and she feels she is harassed and bullied consistently. 
Applicant began her current employment in August 2015.  On November 12, 2016, she
broke her wrist at work.  She had surgery on the 17  and they put a plate in it.  Sheth
returns to light duty on December 13, 2016.
  
Applicant has worked in the defense industry for the past 33 years, and has held
a security clearance for much of that time.  She explained that she has always been
mechanically inclined.  After graduating from high school, she applied for a job as an
overrate operator for a defense contractor.  She was hired, and learned her trade on the
job.  She continued to have hands on training.  After a year, she was able to advance to
a higher paying position, and this process continued over the years, until she learned
her current trade.   She, is and has always been, one of few females in her profession,
and at her previous places of employment.
  
In 2009, while working for a defense contractor A, Applicant received a written
warning, following a confrontation with a worker.  Applicant explained that she was
transferred to second shift, where she and one other worker were the most
experienced.  A number of less experienced mechanics were asking her for help, while
the other experienced mechanic was visiting with someone, and not working.  Applicant 
interrupted him to asked him to help her with the other less experienced mechanics, and
he reported her to the supervisor.  Applicant claims that the matter was blew out of
proportion, and she ultimately received a written warning for this.       
2
In 2010, Applicant was terminated from her employment with employer A, for
allegedly making a slanderous remark about a coworker’s anatomy.  Applicant stated
that she never made such a remark and she tried to stay away from the accusers. 
Applicant went to the Union for help.  They tried to help her, but she was unsuccessful. 
Applicant also went to the EEOC about discrimination in the matter, but they did not
take the case.  
In April 2014, Applicant was terminated from employment at company B, for
violating the company’s regulations for altering a confined space entry form.  Applicant
explained that in order to work in a confined space, the supervisor must sign the form
and date it each day to authorize the work.  Applicant’s supervisor came in later that day
and did not sign the confined space form for the Applicant.  It was a Saturday. 
Applicant’s form was only approved for a Friday.  Applicant, however, went ahead and
worked in the confined space on Saturday.  She states that she annotated the form on
the bottom of the page to verify that she was working in the confined space on that
Saturday.  This is against company policy and Applicant was terminated for committing
this violation.  The day after she was fired, Applicant went to the Union and filed a
grievance.  Applicant subsequently won her grievance, signed a confidential settlement
agreement, and was fully restored to her previous position, as if she never left.  She
worked there another four months, before she moved on to another opportunity.           
In June 2014, Applicant received a written warning from her employment at
company C, following a confrontation with a coworker.  At the time, Applicant was
working as a landscaping worker on a ranch, where she shared community housing with
three other girls.  Applicant was disliked by the other girls for some reason.  She was  
moved to another facility, and eventually left the job.     
In June 2015, Applicant was terminated from her employment at company D.  By
this time she had won her grievance from company B, and went back to her job. 
Applicant does not know why she was involuntarily terminated, as she was not given a
reason.  
Applicant provided copies of e-mails she received from a Government Human
Resources Specialist, concerning a job she applied for as a Sheet Metal Worker.  The
e-mail indicates that she was found suitable to work as a Federal employee, as a sheet
worker.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and D.)  Applicant ended up not taking the job because
of its low pay.
Applicant provided letters of recommendations from neighbors, coworkers and
managers she knows or has worked with.  The letters collectively attest to her excellent
skill in assembling and disassembling, her quality work, ability to problem solve, strong
ambition, dependability, honesty, integrity and leadership skills.  She is recommended
for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit D.)  Applicant stated that she
is doing an outstanding job at her current place of employment. 
Applicant’s 35 year old son testified that his mother is a hard worker, and is
extremely reliable and trustworthy.  His father was not around, and she raised him.  She
3
gave him his strong work ethic.  He believes all of his mother’s problems are because
she is a threat to the men she works with.  (Tr. pp. 98-99.)   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(c) credible adverse information is several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and  
16.(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community
standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that
country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other
group.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
4
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
5
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant hera security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in poor personal conduct (Guideline E).  The totality of this
evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the
Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there
is a nexus or connection with her security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under the above
mentioned guidelines. 
Applicant works in a male dominated profession, and is frequently the only
female in her workplace.  This in itself can present a difficult situation.  History has
shown that women have had a tough time working in industries that are traditionally
male dominated.  Applicant may at times pose a threat to the men she works with,
without understanding or even being aware of it.  She obviously must be careful not to
offend her colleagues where egos can be easily hurt and at the same time avoid being
the subject of gender abuse.  That said, this is not a case where egos have been hurt or 
anyone has been abused.  This is much different.  Applicant has received too many
warnings and terminations over a short period of time that show that she has violated
company policy and procedure in some aspect serious enough to be terminated on
three occasions.  Although Applicant contends that she has done nothing wrong,
without evidence to the contrary, Applicant’s conduct is responsible for these problems. 
In reviewing the investigation in this matter, it was reported by one employer that
Applicant performs outstanding work, but can be disruptive to the work force by letting
her emotions get to her.  Applicant was questioned about this by the investigator, and
she denied letting her emotions get to her in the work place.  She then stated that she
wants to be treated fairly at work, and she admitted that at times she gets emotional. 
She also admits to getting upset and speaking or complaining to supervisors when she
feels that she has been treated unfairly and not the same as her male coworkers.  This
in itself is not enough to result in termination, not even once.    
The decision in this case may have been different, had the Applicant provided
specific evidence to show otherwise.  There is no evidence in the record to show that
Applicant’s three previous employers terminated her unjustly, or that the warnings she
received were unwarranted.  The grievance she won, did not prove that she followed
the company regulations, in fact she admits that she did not.  Applicant submitted
numerous letters of recommendation from neighbors, friends, and coworkers, who know
her in and out of the work place.  They are all favorable.   Testimony from her son was
also favorable as expected.  However, there is an obvious piece missing to his puzzle. 
It is highly unlikely and almost impossible to be terminated three times from three
6
different employers unless you have violated company policy and procedure or
otherwise caused a serious problem in or for the workplace.  An Applicant who is
entrusted with the national secrets is required to do the right thing when no one else is
watching, even if they might never get caught.  Based upon her past history, without
more evidence to prove otherwise, it is found that this Applicant cannot be trusted to do
the right thing when no one is looking.
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition 16.(c) credible
adverse information is several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information; and 16.(e) personal conduct, or concealment of
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for exploitation or
pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other group apply.  None of
the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in her everyday life to adequately protect
the Government’s national interest.  According to the standards set forth in the
Directive, based upon the conduct outlined here, this Applicant has demonstrated that
she is not sufficiently trustworthy, and she does not meet the eligibility requirements for
access to classified information. 
    
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing her request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
                         Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e: Against the Applicant.
  
     
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
8
