 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 12-09080 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He had a judgment and four 
delinquent accounts. The majority of the delinquent was home mortgage related, which 
has been fully forgiven. His wife’s job loss and chronic medical illness contributed to his 
financial problems. Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 12, 2015, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On July 15, 
2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
November 10, 2015. The FORM contained six attachments (Items). Applicant received 
a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. On 
February 8, 2016, Applicant responded to the FORM. DC had no objection to the 
material submitted, and it was admitted as Item A. On February 8, 2016, I was assigned 
the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he asserted he had paid the judgment (SOR 
1.e), a charged-off account (SOR 1.d), and was making monthly payments on another 
delinquent account (SOR 1.f). He admitted the remaining debts. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 72-year-old crane operator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since May 1980. He is seeking to retain a secret clearance. From January 
1966 to January 1972, he served in the U.S. Army during the Viet Nam war. He is 
married and is raising his 16-year-old grandson. In 2009, he and his wife’s adjusted 
gross income was approximately $133,000. (Item A) In 2010, his wife lost her job and 
went on unemployment. Her weekly income went from $1,100 to $60 per week. (Item 4, 
page 6) After two years, her unemployment payments ended. In 2012, his wife suffered 
a seizure. (Item A) His wife then age 56, applied for social security disability payments, 
but the record is silent whether payments have been granted. He also experienced 
$25,000 in flood damage to his property. (Item A) 
 
 In 1996, Applicant purchased a home. The mortgage note was held by a series 
of mortgage lenders including the lenders in SOR 1.a ($14,082 past due) and SOR 1.b 
($61,845 past due). There was also a second mortgage on the home (SOR 1.c, $3,819 
past due). Normally, when a mortgage note transfers from one lender to the next holder 
in due course, the previous lender rights to collect on the mortgage note ends. In 
January 2014, Applicant made his most recent payment on the second mortgage. (Item 
6, page 3) In August 2015, he made his most recent payment on the first mortgage. 
(Item 6, page 2) 
 
 On April 24, 2015, the most recent holder of the mortgage note (SOR 1.b) 
informed Applicant that he would receive full forgiveness of the remaining principal 
balance on the home loan. (Item 2, page 15) This forgiveness was the result of a 
settlement agreement between the Department of Justice and the mortgage lender. The 
letter informed him that any additional payments he made would be applied to the 
balance. He was also informed that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) could be 
informed of any debt forgiveness. 
 
 
3 
 Applicant provided no additional information as to the $3,819 past-due on the 
second mortgage (SOR 1.c). Often state law requires a lender to look to the collateral, 
i.e., the home, for recovery of any moneys owed. However, Applicant provided no 
information on the state law and no documentation as to the status of the second 
mortgage.  
 
 As of November 2014, Applicant had “satisfied in full” the judgment listed in SOR 
1.e ($2,210). (Item 2, page 10) On November 2010, the debt charged-off account in 
SOR 1.d ($5,011) was cancelled. An IRS Form 1099C, cancellation of debt, was issued. 
(Item 2, page 9) In April and May 2015, $500 was withdrawn automatically from his 
bank account each month and applied to the debt in SOR 1.f ($16,147). (Item 2, pages 
11and 12) He asserts he is on a monthly repayment plan and the balance owed has 
been reduced to $10,300. (Item 2, page 2) 
 A non-SOR debt, which Applicant had listed in his April 2012 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (Item 3, pages 34 and 35) has 
been paid and the lawsuit dismissed. (Item A) Applicant’s credit reports show numerous 
accounts as being “paid as agreed.” (Items 5 and 6) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
4 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his or her finances to meet his or her financial 
obligations. 
 
 The SOR listed a judgment, three past-due accounts, one collection account, and 
one charged-off account, which totaled approximately $103,000. Disqualifying 
 
5 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Due to a settlement agreement between the Department of Justice and the 
mortgage lender, Applicant’s mortgage debt (SOR 1.b, $61,845) has been forgiven. The 
past-due amount owed in SOR 1.a ($14,082) was owed to a previous holder of the 
mortgage note. That right to collect on any delinquent debt would have been 
extinguished when the mortgage note transferred to the new holder in due course. The 
past-due mortgage debt in SOR 1.a is not a collectable debt. 
 
 The debt in SOR 1.d has been cancelled and an IRS Form 1099C issued. The 
amount of debt cancelled is less than the charged-off amount, but it would be highly 
unusual that a lender would chose to cancel only part of a debt and inform the IRS that 
only part of the debt was cancelled. I do not believe SOR 1.d remains a debt owed by 
Applicant. Applicant paid the judgment in DOR 1.e and has documentation confirming 
full satisfaction on the debt. 
 
 Applicant is making monthly payments on the collection debt (SOR 1.f). Even 
though only two monthly payments of $500 each are documented, I believe his 
assertion that monthly payments are being made and the balance has been reduced to 
approximately $10,000. This belief comes from his having arranged payments on other 
 
6 
obligations and honoring those payments on the judgment, and his paying off of a non-
SOR debt.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies. His credit report shows numerous accounts that were paid as 
agreed. His wife losing her job, her illness, and the flood damage to his property all led 
to his financial problems. These are unusual circumstances that were beyond his 
control. For the same reasons, AG & 20(b) applies. Based on the events in his life, he 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) applies in part. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. However, 74 percent of the debt 
relates to the first mortgage on his home, which is now forgiven. Thus, there are clear 
indications the majority of his financial problems are resolved.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debts in SOR 1.e and 
f. ($1,256). It is arguable that Applicant may not honor his monthly payments related to 
the collection debt, however, his action in honoring other repayment agreements leads 
me to believe he will continue with his monthly payments. There is no documentation 
concerning the second mortgage and the listed $3,819 past-due amount. This amount is 
sufficiently small as not to be of security concern in light of his efforts to address his 
other delinquencies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in the 
U.S. Army during a time of war. The debts incurred were not the type that indicates poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Money 
 
7 
was not spent frivolously, nor spent on luxuries. There is no indication he is living 
beyond his means. He is 72 years old and has worked for his company since 1980. His 
credit report list numerous accounts as being paid as agreed. The majority of 
Applicant’s past-due debt has been addressed. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
