 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10686 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 29, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F and detailed reasons why 
DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On November 12, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated March 14, 2016, was provided to him by letter dated 
March 15, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on March 23, 2016. He was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit any information within the 30-day period. On 
December 27, 2016, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old pipefitter who seeks a security clearance in conjunction 
with prospective employment with a defense contractor. (Items 3, 7)  
 
On his SF-86, Applicant reported that he attended community college for four 
months in 2002, but did not graduate. He never married and has no dependents. In 
2000, Applicant received an entry level separation from the U.S. Navy after serving less 
than one month. (Items 3, 7) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists five tax-related allegations. Two of those allegations are for 
delinquent federal taxes in the amounts of $1,180.68 and $3,689.17, for tax years 2009 
and 2010, respectively. The remaining three allegations are for delinquent state taxes in 
the amounts of $165; $1,430; and $1,400, for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011, 
respectively. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e)  
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, he claimed that all of the debts alleged have been 
paid. However, as Department Counsel noted in his FORM, he provided no 
documentation to substantiate this claim. (Item 2) Moreover, during Applicant’s July 
2012 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he 
stated that he had not filed or paid his 2010 and 2011 federal income taxes, nor had he 
filed or paid his 2009, 2010, 2011 state income taxes. (FORM; Items 2, 7) Applicant 
disclosed several periods of unemployment in his SF-86, the most recent being five 
months in 2012. 
  
Applicant’s FORM response did little to enhance his situation. There is no record 
evidence documenting any attempt by Applicant to contact the IRS or his state tax 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
authorities or evidence that he paid his taxes as he claimed. There is no record 
evidence that Applicant sought financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG 
¶ 18 as follows: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts);” 19(c) (a history of 
not meeting financial obligations), and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). In response to the 
Government’s information, it was incumbent on Applicant to produce information 
sufficient to refute or mitigate the facts established against him. He did not submit any 
documents in response to the SOR or the FORM. Applicant did not show that he had 
paid or otherwise resolved his tax arrearages to the IRS or to his state tax authority.  
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before 
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been 
gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a mature, 
responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his financial 
problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access to 
classified information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these 
adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
