 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-05009 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 13, 2014. On 
January 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The AG are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the 
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on May 4, 2016. On May 5, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
 
 2
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. The FORM 
consisted of the SOR (Item 1), his answer to the SOR (Item 2), his security clearance 
application (Item 3), an unauthenticated summary of a personal subject interview 
conducted in May 2014 (Item 4), and three credit bureau reports (CBRs) (Items 5, 6, 
and 7). He received the FORM on May 11, 2016, and did not respond.1 The case was 
assigned to me on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations but asserted that 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are duplicates. His admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old airfield operations dispatcher employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2000. He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from 
October 1977 to October 1981 and received an honorable discharge. He served in the 
Air National Guard (ANG) from June 1982 to December 2013, holding the rank of 
master sergeant and assigned as an assistant airfield manager. He retired from the 
ANG in December 2014. He has held a security clearance since October 1977. 
 
 Applicant married in April 1989. He and his wife have three adult children, an 
adopted 10-year-old son, and an 11-year-old foster son. 
 
 In a personal subject interview (PSI) in May 2014, Applicant told the investigator 
that his financial difficulties began after he obtained a home-equity loan to build a pool 
in his backyard. The monthly $400 payments on the loan made it difficult for him to pay 
his other bills. He also had surgery on his shoulder in 2011 and 2013 that caused him to 
miss two or three months of work. He continued to receive pay from the ANG while 
disabled, but not from his job as a contractor. He also was furloughed from his ANG 
position for ten days in 2012-2013 and lost ten days of pay. Finally, he and his wife 
separated in May 2013 and reconciled in January 2014. While they were separated, he 
voluntarily paid his wife $400 per month in child support. (Item 4 at 3-5.) 
 
In the PSI, Applicant told the investigator that the judgment filed in May 2011 for 
$1,073, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, had been satisfied for about two years. (Item 4 at 6.) He 
provided no documentary evidence showing that the judgment has been satisfied. 
However, it is not reflected in the May 2016 CBR. Since the judgment was filed less 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of Item 4; 
make corrections, additions, deletions, or updates; or object to the lack of authentication. I have treated 
his lack of response to the FORM as a waiver of any objections to Item 4. See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 
at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) (“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are 
expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
 3
than seven years preceding the May 2016 CBR, its deletion from his credit record 
indicates that it was resolved.3 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant told the investigator that the judgments for $27,507 and 
$2,610, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, were for delinquent credit-card accounts, and 
that he would pay them by the end of 2014, using money from his retirement account. 
(Item 4 at 6.) In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the judgments were 
unsatisfied. They are reflected as unsatisfied in the May 2016 CBR. (Item 7.) 
 
 In the PSI and his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that the collection 
account for $2,898, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c are 
duplicates. He did not submit any documentary evidence supporting his claim. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute 
of limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
  
 
 4
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 5
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, frequent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s childcare expenses for foster 
children were voluntarily incurred and not beyond his control. The primary cause for his 
financial problems was a home-equity loan for a pool that he could not afford. However, 
he encountered several conditions largely beyond his control: a shoulder injury that 
made him unable to work as a contractor for two or three months, a ten-day furlough, 
and a marital separation. He has not acted responsibly regarding the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. He told the investigator during his PSI that he intended to resolve 
them by the end of 2014, using his retirement account. He has presented no evidence 
of efforts to resolve the debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant presented no evidence of financial 
counseling, and his financial problems are not under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. However, Applicant 
presented no evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 
1.d. 
 
 6
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant claimed that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.d duplicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, he provided no documentary evidence to support 
his claim. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent 
debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 7
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
