 
  1
           
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 14-03680 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances largely beyond her control, Applicant 
experienced financial difficulties, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly under 
the circumstances. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 26, 
2014. On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 The SOR was sent to Applicant on September 2, 2014. She answered the SOR 
September 25, 2014, and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 31, 2015. On 
 
  2
April 22, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM,) which included 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, was sent to Applicant, who was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on April 28, 2015 and filed a timely 
response. The case was assigned to me on December 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $11,339. In her 
Answer, Applicant admits SOR allegations 1.a through 1.c, denies SOR allegations 1.d 
through 1.i, and qualifies each of her responses. The delinquent debts are reflected in 
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) dated March 2014 and March 2015. (GX 4; GX 
5.) Her admissions in her Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old training developer employed in the defense industry   
since at least 2001, and by her current employer since May 2005. She served honorably 
in the U.S. Navy Reserve from June 2000 until August 2007. She took college courses 
from October 2005 until at least February 2014. She married in 1988, separated in 
2011, and has since divorced. She has three adult children. She has held a clearance 
since at least 2003. (GX 2; GX 3.)  
 
The record evidence shows that in 2003, Applicant was granted a conditional 
security clearance due to financial concerns. She and her husband experienced 
financial difficulties due to a number of factors, including over-spending on credit cards, 
but primarily due to a loss of income from a cost of living adjustment when they were 
reassigned, then a second loss of income after her husband left the military. However, 
there is no record evidence that Applicant’s financial difficulties continued between 2003 
and 2011, and she continues to hold a security clearance. (GX 3; GX 1.) 
 
When Applicant and her husband of 22 years separated in January 2011, she 
again experienced financial issues. Her husband verbally agreed to pay half the 
mortgage loan payments until they had a finalized separation agreement in place. 
Subsequently, he did not make the payments and refused to enter into a written 
separation agreement. At the time that she went from a dual-income household to a 
single-income household, Applicant had two children in college and one in high school, 
which necessarily contributed to her overall expenses. Ultimately, Applicant fell behind 
on her mortgage-loan payments (SOR ¶ 1.a) and two credit-card accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.c). 
 
Applicant has resolved the $8,938 delinquent mortgage-loan debt alleged in SOR 
¶1.a. She successfully received a mortgage loan modification in June 2014, has 
maintained her payments since that time, and the account is current with a $0 past-due 
balance. (GX 5.) 
 
The two credit-card accounts with past-due amounts of $578 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and 
$183 (SOR ¶ 1.c), were charged off for $8,596 and $6,838 in 2014. These charge-offs 
 
  3
are not alleged in the SOR. In her Answer and response to the FORM, Applicant 
explained that in 2015, she contacted the creditor and entered repayment plans to 
return each account to a current status, and she has maintained the repayment 
schedules.  
 
The parking violation debts of $400 (SOR ¶ 1.d), $400 (SOR ¶ 1.e), $300 (SOR ¶ 
1.f), and $250 (SOR ¶ 1.g) are not Applicant’s debts. In her Answer, she explained that 
she was unaware of the debts until her background investigation and that the violations 
were incurred by her mother. She provided a document dated September 24, 2014, 
which shows the debts were paid in full. (Answer.) The debts do not appear on the 
March 2015 CBR. (GX 5.) 
 
Applicant disputed the $214 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. She explained 
that the debt does not belong to her, and provided a file number for her dispute claim. 
However, she stated that she would pay this debt in full if it was shown to be hers. 
(Answer.) 
 
Applicant disputed the $76 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. She explained that the debt 
does not belong to her, and provided a file number for her dispute claim. The debt does 
not appear on the March 2015 CBR. (Answer; GX 5.) 
 
Applicant has not incurred any recent delinquent debt, and she lives within her 
means. (GX 5; Answer.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
  4
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
  5
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
   
 The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under 
this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems were attributable to matters largely beyond 
her control, primarily her separation and subsequent divorce. Specifically, Applicant’s 
husband reneged on his verbal agreement to pay half the mortgage-loan payments until 
a separation agreement was finalized. The shift from two household incomes to one had 
a significant impact on Applicant’s ability to maintain her finances. However, she acted 
responsibly by proactively addressing each of her debts. She successfully entered and 
has maintained a mortgage-loan modification since June 2014. She credibly explained 
in detail that she has maintained repayment plans since 2015 with the creditor of the 
two other past-due debts alleged in the SOR, and has brought these accounts to current 
statuses. Upon learning of the parking violation debts, totaling $1,350, she recognized 
they were her mother’s debts and facilitated their resolution. She disputed, as not hers, 
the two remaining SOR debts, one of which no longer appears on her CBR.  
 
 Applicant has acted in good faith by resolving or otherwise addressing all of her 
debt. “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
 
  6
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an 
evaluation of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-
collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is 
not required to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need 
only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make 
payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts 
alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 
2008).  
 
 Although Applicant’s finances are not perfect, she has established and 
implemented a plan to resolve her delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has held the same job for nearly 12 years. She served honorably in the 
military, and has held a security clearance since at least 2003. She has not incurred any 
recent delinquent debt and lives within her means. Such actions are indicative of an 
individual who is reliable and trustworthy and who exercises good judgment.  I am 
confident that Applicant will continue her efforts to maintain financial stability. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
 
  7
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    For Applicant. 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
