 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05235 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 13, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 13, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006. 
  
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on March 4, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 20, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on July 5, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 26, 2016. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant offered two exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits (AppXs) A 
and B. Department Counsel had no objections, and they were admitted. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 3, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement & Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old “sales Representative.”  (GX 1 at pages 5 and 12.)  In 
2008, her six-day-old son passed away.  (TR at page 23 lines 3~18.)  That, coupled with 
“a non-supportive husband,” caused her to seek medical treatment.  “The  doctor gave 
. . . [her] Xanax” to help . . . [her] sleep and eat.”  (TR at page 24 lines 3~16.)  Applicant 
describes her physical and mental state in the following terms: “I had just been given an 
emergency C-Section and I was losing weight and I wasn’t sleeping and I was sick.  
And the Xanax made me worse. It gave me nightmares. It made me jittery. It made me 
more irritable.”  (Id.)  She then took the advice of “a former family member,” who 
suggested that she might “smoke some marijuana” to treat her maladies.  (TR at page 
24 lines 3~16, and at page 24 line 25 to page 25 line 4.) 
 
 1.a.  Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 2008 until about July 
of 2010.  As her physical condition improved, she decided to stop using the drug.  (TR 
at page 29 line 22 to page 30 line 9.) 
 
 1.b. and 1.d.  In August of 2010, Applicant tested positive for marijuana.  She 
was confident that she would pass a urinalysis; but not a hair sample test, as the 
residual marijuana remains in one’s hair months after last usage.  (TR at page 30 line 
20 to page 31 line 7.)   Indeed, Applicant tested positive again as the result of a hair 
sample test, which resulted in her losing her job.  (TR at page 29 lines 2~21, and at 
page 30 line 20 to page 32 line 6.) 
 
 1.c.  In November of 2010, Applicant volunteered for “Substance Abuse 
Treatment.” (TR at page 26 line 24 to page 28 line 22, and AppX B at page 2.)  During 
this treatment, “It was determined that . . . [Applicant] had a Low Probability of having a 
Substance Use Disorder.” (AppX B at page 2.)   Her “Substance Abuse Professional” 
averred, in part, the following: 
  
[Applicant] . . . began treatment on November 13, 2010 and completed on 
January 20, 2011.  [Applicant] . . . was cooperative and compliant with all 
treatment objectives, voluntarily attended several AA/NA meetings and 
paid all required fees to this agency.  Prior to her discharge she tested 
negative for any substances. 
 
[Applicant] . . . demonstrated the insights and understandings regarding 
her violations and lifestyle.  The undersigned counselor believes that she 
has made a substantial change to her perception and behavior and that 
her SUDs violations are unlikely to reoccur.  (AppX B at page 2.)  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has also signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  (AppX B at page 1.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant used marijuana from 2008~2010.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program . . . 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant has not used any illegal substance for more than six years, eschews 
any future usage, and has successfully completed a treatment program. She has 
established mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(d), and 26(d). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) . . . so much time has passed, . . . or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast a doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct was an attempt at self-medication after the tragic loss of her 
infant.  She has successfully completed drug counseling.  It is highly unlikely that this 
distant lack of judgment will occur again in the future.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is highly respected 
in the workplace, as evidence by six letters of support, and by a plethora of awards.  
(AppX at pages 3~44.) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without serious questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
