 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04667 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. For an extended period of time 
ending in July 2011, Applicant used marijuana after having been granted a Department 
of Defense (DoD) security clearance. Due to changes in his life, the fact he self-reported 
his problem, and the passage of time, he has mitigated the drug involvement security 
concern. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On December 31, 2014, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reason (SOR) detailing drug involvement 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On January 15, 
2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On December 4, 2015, I 
was assigned the case. The case was originally assigned to a different judge and set for 
hearing on September 14, 2015, but the hearing was cancelled. On February 17, 2016, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
resetting the hearing to be convened on February 26, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1, 2, and 3 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant and his wife testified at the hearing. Applicant provided no exhibits 
at the hearing; however, the record was kept open to allow Applicant to present 
additional documents. Additional material was presented and admitted without objection 
as Ex. A. On March 7, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted his use of marijuana following the 
death of his wife. His admissions are incorporated as facts. After a thorough review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old team leader who has worked for a defense contractor 
since July 1988 and he seeks to retain a security clearance. He has been with his 
company 28 years. (Tr. 24) He received secret clearances in November 1991 and June 
2004. In October 2010, he married a second time, and they have three children. (Tr. 24) 
The marriage occurred 14 months after the death of his first wife.  
 On Sunday August 9, 2009, Applicant woke up and found that his wife had died 
next to him in bed of congestive heart failure during the night. (Tr. 20, 21) She was 44 
years old. They had been married 18 years. Following his wife’s death, during the 
grieving process, he had problem sleeping. A friend suggested that smoking marijuana 
prior to bed would help him sleep. (Ex. 2, Tr. 22) The friend provided some marijuana 
and Applicant used it. Applicant found that a couple of puffs of marijuana were sufficient 
to help him relax and fall asleep. He purchased a couple of joints a month from his 
friend. (Ex. 2)  
 Applicant had previously used marijuana while in high school. From the summer 
of 1983 through the summer of 1985, while in the ninth and tenth grades, he smoked 
marijuana. (Ex. 3) One of the problems he had with marijuana at that time was that it 
made him sleepy. (Tr. 23, 30) He stopped smoking because he wanted to graduate 
from high school. (Ex. 3) He graduated high school in June 1988 and started working for 
his current employer, a month later, in July 1988. 
 For six months, Applicant used marijuana nightly before he began to worry about 
its possible effects and the impact it would have on his clearance. He sought better 
ways to handle his stress. His use tapered off to those limited occasions “when he was 
really having a lot of trouble getting [to] sleep.” (Ex. 2) He would attempt to go with using 
 
3 
 
marijuana and would make it a few days to as much as three weeks before the lack of 
sleep resulted in him using again (Tr. 32) 
 After about 14 months, Applicant remarried and his new wife2 did not approve of 
marijuana. At the same time, Applicant was becoming more involved with his church3 
and did not believe marijuana use fit in with his Christian beliefs. (Ex. 2)  
 Applicant sought help for his drinking and marijuana use through the employee 
assistance program. He was directed to an intense4 outpatient treatment program, 
which helped him to end his marijuana usage. (Tr. 24) He was never diagnosed as drug 
dependent or an abuser of drugs. He last used marijuana prior to his July 2011 entry 
into the treatment program. The three-month treatment program involved group 
counseling three times weekly, weekly family counseling, weekly individual counseling, 
study, and education. (Ex. A, Tr. 26) He was active with the workbooks and very 
interested in learning. (Tr. 41) He asserts he received a favorable prognosis.5 (Tr. 26) 
His current wife assisted him in the treatment program. She had no substance abuse 
problems. 
 Applicant obtained an Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) sponsor and was active in his 
involvement with AA. (Ex. A, Tr. 41) Grief support was received from his local church. 
(Ex. A) He had not sought grief counseling at the time of his wife’s death. (Tr. 32)  
Since entering the program, Applicant no longer associates with the friend who 
suggested he use marijuana. He does not associate with individuals who use illegal 
drugs. Applicant does not intend to use marijuana again and acknowledged it was a 
mistake to use marijuana. He stated he had learned from his mistake. (Tr. 28) He 
acknowledged his conduct was entirely his fault and he alone was to blame. (Tr. 28)  
Policies 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
2 Applicant and his wife knew each other from the age nine or ten. They went to the same church, were in 
the same church group, and graduated high school together. (Tr. 38) At one time they worked for the 
same employer before their lives diverged. In 2007, her husband had died in a motorcycle accident. 
Following the death of his wife and the death or her husband, their mothers got them together at 
Christmas 2009. (Tr. 39)  
 
3 Applicant is a Sunday school teacher and, as of February 2014, an ordained deacon. (Tr. 12, 25) 
 
4 Applicant had first considered a local treatment program, but he determined it was not as intense a 
treatment program as he wanted it to be. (Tr. 25) 
 
5 Applicant asserts it was difficult getting information about his treatment due to the passage of time and 
the treatment center he attended no longer exists. (Ex. A) Following his treatment, Applicant threw away 
the material he had received from the program believing he would not need it in the future. (Tr. 26)  
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
 
5 
 
Following the death of Applicant’s wife, he used marijuana until July 2011. His 
use occurred while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 25 describes the applicable 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
 In July 2011, Applicant last used marijuana and never intends to use illegal drugs 
again. He acknowledged his use was wrong. He realizes how stupid his decision was to 
use illegal drugs and what he risked. He is remorseful and ashamed of his actions. He 
takes responsibility for his actions and understands the consequences. He self-reported 
his usage. His misconduct was not discovered by his employer, but he chose to come 
forward and admit the problem and seek help for the problem. His usage was wrong 
and inappropriate, but he is the one to bring the problem to the attention of his 
employer.  
 
The government has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse 
information about an applicant before making a security clearance decision. The 
government relies on an applicant to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a 
timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient. Further, an 
 
6 
 
applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some 
indication of his willingness to report inadvertent violations or other concerns in the 
future, something the government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit 
the compromise of sensitive information. Self identifying such a serious problem gives 
an indication Applicant is willing to put government interests ahead of his personal 
needs. 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use followed the death of his wife of 18 years. On Sunday 
morning August 9, 2009, Applicant awoke only to find that his wife had died beside him 
during the night. Following her death, a friend suggested to Applicant that he try 
marijuana to help him sleep. More than 30 years earlier, while in high school, he had 
used marijuana and knew it made him sleepy. He used marijuana when he could not 
get to sleep. For the first six months, he used it regularly taking a puff or two before bed. 
Then his use tapered off as he worried about his job and the effect marijuana was 
having on him. He would go days at a time and even up to three weeks before his lack 
of sleep caused him to use again. He realized he needed help to stop using and sought 
out an intensive treatment program. His use stopped in July 2011, more than five years 
ago. 
 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”6 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence 
of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively 
emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave 
too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
 
7 
 
 
Because of his abstention from drug use for five years, and his recognition of the 
adverse impact on his life that drug abuse could cause, the incompatibility of illegal use 
with his goals, and his stated desire never to use illegal drugs again, there is reasonable 
certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. Applicant voluntary sought help 
for his illegal usage. He disclosed it on his e-QIP. His illegal drug use ending more than 
two years ago does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Because he will not use illegal drugs in the future, confidence in his current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment with respect to drug use is restored. AG ¶ 
26(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) applies because he has disassociated from drug-using associates 
and has not used marijuana in more than five years.  
 
AG ¶ 26(d) applies. He and his wife received three months of intense outpatient 
treatment and he asserts he received a favorable prognosis. He was never diagnosed 
as having substance abuse or dependence issues. He had used cannabis to cope with 
stress and help him sleep.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Following the death of his spouse, a 
very traumatic event, Applicant started using marijuana to help him sleep. He should 
have sought other way to address his inability to sleep. Applicant self-reported his 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing]. It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
8 
 
marijuana use. He was never arrested for possession of marijuana, and his marijuana 
use was not detected during urinalysis testing. He realizes his conduct was wrong and 
inappropriate. He is remorseful about his marijuana use and intends to never use illegal 
drugs again. He recognized his problem and sought professional help that he completed 
an intensive treatment program, and the passage of time indicates he will not use 
marijuana in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
