                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05160
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s two children are U.S. citizens, and his wife and mother are permanent
U.S. residents. All of them have returned to the United States from Pakistan, thereby
mitigating any heightened risk of coercion or pressure from the government of Pakistan.
Given Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships in the United States, he can be
expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest that may arise stemming from his
remaining relatives, who are citizens and residents of Pakistan, in favor of the U.S.
interest. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On September 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)  issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B, foreign influence.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
1
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 11, 2016, admitting the allegations. He
initially requested a decision on the administrative record without a hearing, and later
switched his preference to a hearing. On October 19, 2016, I received the case
assignment. DOD issued a notice of hearing on November 8, 2016, scheduling the
hearing for December 5, 2016. I held the hearing as scheduled. During the hearing, I
received three Government exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3,
and considered Applicant’s testimony. Also, I took administrative notice, at Department
Counsel’s request, of the adjudicative facts set forth in six documents, marked as
Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through VI. At the end of the hearing, I left the record open, at
Applicant’s request, to allow him the opportunity to submit exhibits. Within the time
allotted, Applicant submitted nine exhibits, marked and received as Applicant’s Exhibits
(AE) A through AE I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old married man with two children, ages three and two.  He
earned a bachelor’s degree in 2012, majoring in information systems and operations
systems management. (Tr. 29) Currently, Applicant works for a federal government
contractor, managing information technology related to human resources. (Tr. 17) 
Applicant was born in Pakistan. In 2000, at age 11, he immigrated to the United
States with his father and brother. (Tr. 28) His father did not bring the remainder of the
family, Applicant’s mother and sister, because he was poor and could not afford to bring
everyone. (Tr. 21-22) When Applicant first immigrated to the United States, he could not
speak English. (Tr. 29) His father would frequently take lengthy trips to Pakistan, lasting
as long as a month at a time, leaving Applicant and his brother to take care of
themselves. (Tr. 30) By the time Applicant was in 11  grade, he was employed full timeth
at a fast-food restaurant, working weekend overnight shifts, while attending school. (Tr.
31) His younger brother started working shortly thereafter. Their father would take all of
the money that they earned. (Tr. 31)
Ultimately, Applicant’s high school counselor became suspicious and reported
Applicant’s situation to the local social services agency. (Tr. 29) After a social worker
visited the home and interviewed Applicant and his brother, they were placed in foster
care. (Tr. 30) Applicant lived with a foster family from age 16 to 18, then moved into a
semi-independent living program where he received subsidized housing. (Tr. 33) After
graduating from high school, Applicant attended college. He financed his college
education with a combination of federal grants and income from work. (Tr. 33-34)
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009. (Tr. 21) 
Applicant’s wife, a homemaker, is a citizen of Pakistan. She has permanent U.S.
resident status. (AE C) Applicant and his wife married in July 2011. Because Applicant
was not financially secure when they married, they decided that she should remain in
2
Pakistan, where the cost of living is cheaper, and live with his mother.  Both of their1
children, U.S. citizens, were born in Pakistan. Applicant’s family joined him in the United
States in August 2015.
 
In April 2016, Applicant lost the job that he held immediately before his current
job. Because he knew that he was going to struggle to make ends meet while
unemployed, he opted for his family to return to Pakistan. As of the hearing date,
Applicant was planning to arrange for the return of his family, including his mother, to the
United States. Per their airline reservations, they are scheduled to return on January 31,
2017. (AE I) Each of Applicant’s family members, including his mother, have
identification cards issued by their state of residence. (AE A) Also, Applicant’s mother
has permanent U.S. residence status. (AE B) 
 
When Applicant’s family lived in Pakistan, he visited them approximately once per
year, and he kept in frequent contact with them. (Tr. 24)  Also, he provided between
$300 and $500 per month in support. (Answer at 5) Now that they have returned to the
United States since the hearing, Applicant has no intention of returning to Pakistan. (AE
G at 1)
Applicant has not been in contact with his father since 2008 when Applicant
entered foster care. He does not know his whereabouts. He remains in touch with his
foster parents, whom he considers “very great people.” (Tr. 34) Applicant’s sister
remains in Pakistan.  They do not stay in touch frequently. (Tr. 19) Applicant’s parents-
in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. They are farmers. Applicant does not speak
with them often.
Administrative Notice
Although Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic, its human rights record
remains poor. (HE VI at 1-2) Although Pakistan remains a critical counterterrorism
partner, several terrorist groups continue to operate in parts of Pakistan with impunity,
and the U.S. Department of State considers parts of Pakistan to be terrorist safe havens.
(HE II at 2) In April 2016, the U.S. Department of State renewed a warning to  U.S.
citizens to defer all nonessential travel to Pakistan, as the presence of several terrorist
groups posed a potential danger to U.S. citizens through Pakistan. (HE 1)
In May 2011, U.S. forces killed Osama bin Laden, mastermind of the 9/11 attacks
and numerous other terrorist attacks around the world. He had been living in hiding in an
affluent suburb of Islamabad, Pakistan’s capital, in a home eight times larger than any
homes in the community, reinforced by extraordinary security measures including 12 to
18 foot walls topped with barbed wire and two security gates. (HE V at 5)
Applicant’s mother also has permanent U.S. residence status.1
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. Under the
whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of
the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest” (AG
4
¶ 6). Moreover, “adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of
the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including,
but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism” (Id.).
Pakistan is a haven for extremist, anti-American groups, including Al Qa’eda,
which masterminded the 9/11 attack. Also, the U.S. Department of State continues to
warn U.S. citizens not to travel there. These concerns raise the issue of whether AG ¶
7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of, or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,”
applies to Applicant’s relationship with his family members who are citizens and
residents of Pakistan. Applicant has had no contact with his father in nearly ten years
and does not know his whereabouts. AG ¶ 7(a) is inapplicable to Applicant’s father
because they have no relationship. As Applicant’s immediate family and mother have
returned to the United States since the hearing, AG ¶ 7(a) no longer applies to them. 
Applicant’s wife and mother’s residence at his home raised the issue of whether 
AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion,” applies. Although the relationship between the United States and
Pakistan has, at times, been tenuous over the years, the countries remain critical
partners.  Under these circumstances, it is unlikely that the government of Pakistan
would seek to exploit one of its citizens living in the United States, such as Applicant’s
wife and mother. AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless
of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” does not apply. 
As for Applicant’s sister and parents in-law, all citizens and residents of Pakistan,
the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(a), as set forth above, is applicable. The
potential vulnerability to coercion, inducement, or duress posed by Applicant’s sister is
mitigated by their rare contact. AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation,” applies. Applicant’s contact with his parents in-law is
similarly infrequent. However, there is a presumption that one’s relationship with in-laws
is not casual. Applicant is thoroughly immersed in U.S. culture, having spent half of his
childhood here. When he first immigrated to the United States at 11 years old, he spoke
no English. By the time he was a teenager, he had no adult on which to depend, as his
father was neglectful. Nevertheless, by the time he was 16, he had learned English, was
attending high school, working full time, and generally supporting himself until he was
moved into foster care. Notwithstanding these impediments, he continued to succeed,
completing college and obtaining gainful employment. His path to success was facilitated
by his foster parents, with whom he is still in contact, together with a network of social
service resources that enabled him to afford housing and a college education. Given the
relationships that he developed while utilizing these resources over the years, I conclude
5
that AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” applies to Applicant’s relationship with his in-laws remaining in Pakistan. 
Considering the application of these mitigating conditions, together with the whole-
person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2(a), I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
6
