 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06683 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 19, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was 
received on April 25, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence identified as Items 2 
through 6, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant submitted 
documents that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though G, and they were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2001 and a master’s 
degree in 2007. He indicated in his answer to the FORM that he recently married and is 
expecting a child.  
 
 On his security clearance application, Applicant disclosed he has worked for his 
present employer, a government contractor, since April 2012. Before then he was 
employed from June 2009 to April 2012. He disclosed he was unemployed from 
January 2006 to June 2009. He owned a business from January 2004 to January 2007. 
During his background interview, Applicant explained he shut down the business from 
January 2006 to January 2007, and did not earn income from the business. He 
indicated his reason for closing his business was to pursue his education. He attended 
school to earn his master’s degree from January 2006 to August 2008.1 
 
 Credit reports from September 2013 and September 2014 substantiate the debts 
alleged in the SOR.2 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a ($3,798) is a charged-off account. Applicant was made aware of this 
debt during his November 2013 background interview. Applicant stated in his answer to 
the SOR that when he was in college in 1996 he applied for a credit card. He made 
payments on the card. He accumulated a balance of $9,000, but was unable to pay it 
because he did not have enough money. He indicated he reduced the balance to 
$4,000 and was paying the debt. He provided a document from April 2016 that shows 
he settled the account for $1,976. He was advised by the creditor that as a result of the 
settlement, it may be required by the IRS to issue a Form 1099-C to Applicant to be filed 
with his tax returns.3  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b ($3,798) is a judgment filed against Applicant in February 2012. 
Applicant disclosed the judgment on his September 2013 security clearance application. 
Applicant believes this is the same debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. I am unable to make 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4. 
 
2 Items 5, 6. 
 
3 Item 4; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
that determination because the credit reports show it as a different creditor, and I am 
unable to verify account numbers. The document provided by Applicant to show the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was settled, does not substantiate that that debt is a judgment or that 
it was released. Applicant did not provide evidence that this is a duplicative debt.4  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c ($10,997) is a federal tax lien entered in February 2011. In his 
November 2011 interview, Applicant acknowledged he did not pay his 2005 taxes and 
owed the IRS $17,000. He told the investigator that he had the money to pay the taxes 
he owed by the April 2006 due date, but decided not to pay them so he could have 
money while he attended school to obtain his master’s degree. He told the investigator 
that he agreed to an installment plan with the IRS to pay $1,000 a month beginning in 
April 2006. He indicated he made payments from April to approximately October 2006 
and then missed payments because he could not afford the amount. He did not make 
another payment until he arranged a lower amount with the IRS in January 2007. He 
told the investigator that he made $500 monthly payments from January 2007 to either 
June or July 2007, and then stopped because he could no longer afford the payments. 
He did not make payments for four months. He then negotiated a new plan to pay $250 
a month. He stated he made these monthly payments from 2008 to February 2012. He 
said he was then advised by a tax firm to stop making the payments so the firm could 
negotiate a settlement on his behalf. Applicant told the investigator that the balance 
owed to the IRS was about $12,000. He stated he had been in contact with the IRS, and 
it advised him that an agreement would be reached by December 2013 and the 
estimated settlement would be between $2,000 and $3,000. He planned to pay the 
settlement with a tax refund he expected to receive in 2013.5  
 
 The investigator confronted Applicant with the federal tax lien that was filed 
against him in February 2011 for an unpaid balance of $10,997. Applicant indicated he 
was not aware that a tax lien was filed. He indicated he received a letter from the IRS 
advising him a tax lien would be filed against him, but he believed, because he had 
made payments on his tax debt after receiving the notice, that the lien would not be 
filed.6  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence about past payments he 
said he made or installment agreements he had with the IRS. In his November 2015 
answer to the SOR he stated: “I have communicated with the IRS and now I am on 
probation, as long as I pay my taxes 3 years consecutively. I have done 2 years so far 
and next year will be my last year and my debt will be cleared.”7 In his May 2016 
response to the FORM he stated: “My settlement with the IRS has been finalized.”8 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 4, 5, 6; AE A. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant did not provide documentary evidence to substantiate his actions to resolve 
his federal tax lien. 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant showed he had resolved some student 
loans. He indicated his credit rating has improved and he is in a better place financially.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9 AE B, C, D, E, F. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had a delinquent debt, tax lien, and a judgment. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant recently settled a debt that was charged off. He did not provide 
evidence to support his claim that said debt was a duplicate of the other alleged debt or 
that he is resolving his tax lien. Applicant told a government investigator that despite 
having the money, he intentionally decided not to pay his 2005 federal taxes because 
he used the money to pay his expenses while attending school. He advised the 
investigator of different installment agreements he made with the IRS, and each time he 
failed to complete the plan and renegotiated the agreement for lower payments. In his 
response to the FORM, he indicated he has a settlement agreement with the IRS, but 
did not provide evidence of the agreement or payments made on it. He has repeatedly 
reneged on payment plans with the IRS. I cannot find his behavior is unlikely to recur. 
His conduct is recent and casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant attributed his credit card debt to not having sufficient money after 
finishing college. He did not provide specific information. He was unemployed for a 
lengthy period from 2006 to 2009, but it appears he voluntarily chose to attend school 
during part of that time. He has been employed since 2009 and worked for his current 
employer since 2012. He also indicated that he had the money to pay his 2005 federal 
taxes and chose not to so. Some period of unemployment was beyond his control. His 
choices to go to school and not pay his 2005 federal taxes were within his control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not provide sufficient information about his unemployment 
or his finances. It has been seven years since he was unemployed. He recently settled 
charged-off debt despite being employed since 2009. He failed to provide documentary 
evidence regarding the resolution of a 2011 tax lien and a 2012 judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) 
has minimal applicability. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling. He recently 
settled a charged-off debt, but he failed to provide substantiation that this debt is a 
 
7 
 
 
duplicate of a judgment entered against him. Of greater concern, is Applicant’s 
intentional decision to not pay his 2005 federal income tax. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude his finances are under control or the judgment and tax lien are 
resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) does not apply. SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to that 
debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. 
He intentionally failed to pay his 2005 federal taxes. He has a 2011 tax lien that he has 
not resolved. He repeatedly reneged on agreements he made with the IRS to pay his 
tax debt. He failed to provide evidence it is resolved. He did not provide evidence that 
the judgment against him is released. Applicant was on notice in 2013 that his debts 
were a security concern. His unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
concerning his legal obligations to pay taxes is a security concern. He has failed to meet 
his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
