1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
  `  .  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04542 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns. He did present sufficient information 
to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. The DOD issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated December 10, 2015, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F and personal conduct under Guideline E. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 6, 2016. He admitted the three financial 
allegations of delinquent debt, as well as an allegation of bankruptcy in 2001. He denied 
the one allegation under personal conduct for a falsification of his security clearance 
application. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 30, 2016, and the 
case was assigned to me on September 7, 2016. The DOD issued a notice of hearing 
on October 7, 2016, scheduling a hearing for October 25, 2016. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. The Government offered six exhibits that I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6. Applicant testified 
and submitted three exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A, B, and C. I kept the record open for Applicant to 
submit additional documents. Applicant did not submit additional documents. I received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 1, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 40 years old. He first married in 1996 and divorced 
in 2002. He married again in September 2005 and divorced in June 2008. He married 
his present wife in October 2011. He has a one-year-old child by his third wife.  
 
Applicant has held various positions for defense contractors at different military 
installations since 2004. Applicant mainly stayed in the same type of lower level job, but 
the contractors he worked for repeatedly changed. He was granted eligibility for access 
to classified information in 2010 when one of his positions required he have a security 
clearance. Applicant’s income fluctuated whenever the Government changed the 
contractor that employed Applicant. Applicant’s income was either changed to a lower 
pay rate or he was placed in a lower salaried position. Applicant’s wife is the director of 
a childcare facility. Applicant’s yearly income is now approximately $26,000 and his 
wife’s yearly income is approximately $55,000 for a combined income of approximately 
$81,000. Their combined net monthly income is approximately $5,000. The family has 
monthly expenses of approximately $4,300, leaving a net monthly remainder of 
approximately $700. (Tr. 12-14, 23-35, 58-69, 84-87; GX 1, e-QIP dated October 22, 
2014) 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (GX 3, dated March 21,2008; GX 4, dated 
March 21, 2010; GX 5; dated November 18, 2014; and GX 6, dated November 7, 2015) 
confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a charged-off automobile loan for 
$7,836 (SOR 1.a); a medical debt for $200 (SOR 1.b); and another medical debt for 
$4,354 (SOR 1.c). The amount of the alleged delinquent debt is approximately $12,000. 
Also listed is a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in June 2001 with the debts discharged in 
October 2001.   
Applicant’s first spouse was an active duty military member when they married in 
1996. Her salary was more than 75% of the family income. Applicant’s wife decided to 
3 
 
leave the military to increase her income. Shortly after she left the military, her income 
dropped considerably. She went from earning approximately $40,000 a year to earning 
approximately $25,000 a year. Applicant and his wife did not have sufficient income to 
pay their debts because of the drop in income. Applicant believed, but is not sure, that 
his ex-wife attempted to contact some creditors to make payment agreements. He does 
not know the outcome of those discussions. Applicant worked a part time job to have 
additional income to pay bills. He even tried to join the Army Reserves but he did not 
qualify medically. Applicant’s wife decided to declare bankruptcy in June 2001. Since 
she was in the military and the major income producer in the family, Applicant agreed to 
be a party to the bankruptcy. (Tr. 35-41, 78-82) 
The debt at SOR 1.a is for a loan for a van Applicant co-signed for his second ex-
wife. After their marriage in 2005, Applicant learned that his wife was not a United 
States citizen in 2007. He concluded that she married him to ease the process for her to 
gain U.S. citizenship. Applicant decided to terminate the marriage, and his wife moved 
to another state. When the marriage ended, his wife kept the van and agreed to pay the 
loan. She did not make any payments. The car loan creditor informed Applicant that as 
the co-signer of the loan, he was responsible for the loan payments. Applicant 
contacted his wife who told him that she had not been making the loan payments and 
no longer wanted the van. Applicant retrieved the car and returned it to the creditor in 
2008. He received a call from the creditor in 2010 that he owed approximately $7,836 
on the vehicle loan. He called his wife, and she said she would take care of the debt. He 
never checked with her to ensure she was paying the debt, and he never made any 
payment on the debt. The creditor never contacted him after that about the debt. He did 
not receive a notice of payment due or any payment offers from the creditor. The debt 
no longer appeared on his credit report. The next time he knew that the debt was still 
pending was when he looked at a credit report in 2013. By this time, he had contracted 
with an agency to assist him learning about his debts. He did not know what the debt 
pertained to so he had the company research it for him. He learned the debt was for his 
ex-wife’s van returned to the creditor. He has not presented any evidence of any 
attempts to resolve the debt since 2013. (Tr. 41-49, 69-74) 
The debts at SOR 1.b and SOR 1.c are medical debts. Applicant admits that he 
incurred the debts for treatment he received in a hospital. He claims to have paid the 
debt of over $5,000 to the hospital. He is unsure if the two SOR debts were included 
and paid when he paid the debt to the hospital. Applicant agreed at the hearing to 
provide information from the hospital on the details for the bill he paid. He has not 
provided any information that the debts are paid. (Tr. 49-51, 74-84) 
Applicant claims to have hired a credit education services company in 2014 to 
assist him with resolution of his credit issues. Applicant hired the firm because he 
wanted to purchase a house and needed to repair his credit rating. After looking at his 
credit report, he knew he needed assistance to repair his credit rating. Applicant 
presented three letters (AX A, AX B, and AX C) the credit service company prepared for 
him. The letters refer to a judgment, but there is no judgment alleged in the SOR. The 
account numbers listed in the letters do not match the account numbers for the debts 
4 
 
listed in the SOR. Applicant did not present sufficient information that establish that the 
letters pertained to the SOR debts. (Tr. 51-55; AX A, AX B, AX C, Letters, undated) 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he did not think he needed to list the 
financial issues that had been resolved in his 2001 bankruptcy petition and discharge. 
He indicated that there is adverse financial information by reporting on the e-QIP that 
the credit service company was assisting him in disputing some financial issues. He 
indicated on the e-QIP that the disputed items would be removed from his credit reports. 
(Tr. 55-58) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
5 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
Applicant and his first wife filed for bankruptcy in 2001, and their debts were 
discharged. Applicant married again, and he co-signed a vehicle loan for his second 
wife. His second wife did not pay the loan so Applicant returned the vehicle to the 
dealer. Applicant or his ex-wife did not pay the remainder of the loan. Applicant 
acknowledges two medical debts that have not been paid or otherwise resolved. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The evidence 
indicates both an inability and an unwillingness to satisfy debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
6 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a 
continuous course of conduct and thus current. Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible 
means of resolving debt. Based on the circumstances of the debts incurred by June 
2001, Applicant acted reasonably and responsibly in filing the bankruptcy. The medical 
debts and the car loan were incurred under normal everyday circumstances of signing 
for a car loan and receiving medical care. Applicant knew as a co-signer of the car loan 
that he would be responsible for the loan if his wife defaulted. Applicant’s voluntary co-
signing of the car loan was not unusual and was within his ability to control. He could 
not control his wife’s failure to make loan payments, but he had assumed the risk of 
being responsible when he co-signed the loan.   
 
Applicant did not present any information that he has or is receiving financial 
counseling. If he received financial counseling that is required to submit a bankruptcy 
petition, it was over ten years before he incurred the car loan and medical debts. Such 
counseling is not relevant to his present debt situation. 
 
For a good-faith effort under AG ¶ 20(d), there must be an ability to repay the 
debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good faith 
means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence 
to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts is needed. Applicant must 
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt 
payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt 
through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a 
track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial 
problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant offered no documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve his 
car loan and medical debts. He did not present a reasonable plan to resolve the debts 
or establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. He has known about his 
obligation for the car loan since 2010. The only action taken was to call his ex-wife in 
2010 and tell her about her obligation to pay the loan. He has not communicated with 
her since then to inquire if she is meeting her obligation to make payments on the loan. 
He claims to have paid the medical debts for his hospitalization. However, he did not 
present documentation to support his claims of action on or payment of the debts.  
 
Applicant has not presented a reasonable plan to resolve his financial problems 
or documentation to show payment of the debts. Applicant's lack of documented action 
is significant and disqualifying. Applicant has not established that he acted with 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards 
his financial obligations. With evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation to 
support responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control, and that Applicant is not managing his personal 
7 
 
financial obligations reasonably and responsibly. His financial problems are not behind 
him. Applicant’s failure to act reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an 
indication that he may not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant has 
not presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial 
considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant provided limited derogatory financial information on the e-QIP. He only 
noted that he was working with a credit education service company to learn about and 
help resolve his debt so he could clean up his credit report. As noted in the SOR and 
the credit reports, Applicant has significant delinquent debts. His failure to list his 
delinquent debts raises a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying 
Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities).  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the financial part of the e-QIP. He stated 
he did not believe he had to list delinquent debt discharged by bankruptcy. He did not 
know about the medical and car loan delinquent debts until confronted with the debt 
when he received the SOR. While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement 
to the Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, 
concealment, or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate 
and material. It is deliberate if it is knowingly and willfully done with intent to deceive.   
 
 It is reasonable for an Applicant not schooled in security clearance procedure to 
believe that it was not necessary to list debts discharged by bankruptcy on the security 
clearance application. Since the bankruptcy was in 2001, all non-priority unsecured 
debts were beyond the seven year period required in the security clearance application. 
8 
 
While Applicant did not list specifically his car loan and medical debts on the e-QIP, he 
did alert the Government that he may have delinquent debt by referring to his 
arrangement with a credit education service company. I find that Applicant did not know 
of his delinquent debts when he completed his e-QIP. Applicant provided adverse 
financial information as he knew it and as best he could. Applicant did not deliberately 
fail to provide correct and accurate financial information on the security clearance 
application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not know he had 
delinquent debt when he completed his e-QIP, so he did not deliberately fail to provide 
full and accurate information concerning his finances. However, Applicant has not 
provided sufficient credible documentary information to show reasonable and 
responsible action to address delinquent debts and resolve financial problems. 
Applicant has not demonstrated responsible management of his finances or a 
consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation. He has mitigated personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
9 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
