 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05081 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 22, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on four consumer debts, in a total exceeding 
$42,500. He failed to file his 2012 Federal income tax return. He is delinquent on his 
Federal income tax obligations for tax years 2009 through 2011. Applicant failed to 
introduce documentation to show his 2012 Federal income tax return was filed or that 
any of his delinquencies have been resolved. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 14, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 24, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 17, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 23, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 20, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but 
submitted no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 
28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He served in the Navy and achieved the rate of senior 
chief, E8. He retired honorably after 24 years of service. (Tr. 16-17.) He earned two 
Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals during his service. He has worked for a 
Government contractor in his position since 2003. He testified he has held a security 
clearance since 1979. He was separated from his wife; but they have reconciled and 
remain married. He has six adult children. (Tr. 17, 22-24.)  
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on four consumer 
debts, in a total exceeding $42,500. The SOR also alleged he failed to file his 2012 
Federal income tax return. Additionally, he is alleged to be delinquent on his Federal 
income tax obligations for tax years 2009 through 2011. Applicant admitted SOR 
allegations 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. He failed to admit or deny subparagraphs 1.d through 1.h, 
and as a result, those subparagraphs are treated as denials. (Tr. 7.) His debts are 
identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to his 2010 separation from his 
wife and “living above [their] means.” (Tr. 17, 25, 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant’s consumer debts include: a delinquent credit card in the amount of 
$16,251 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a delinquent cellular telephone account in the amount of $1,521 
(SOR ¶ 1.b); a delinquent judgment in the amount of $14,210 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and a 
delinquent loan in the mount of $10,525 (SOR ¶ 1.h.) He testified, “I haven’t reached out 
to any of my creditors,” referring to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c.  (Tr. 
26.) Those accounts are not resolved. He claimed to have paid the loan alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.h, but failed to produce any documentation to support his claim. (Tr. 25-35.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in the 
amounts of: $3,585.75 for tax year 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.e); $3,558.91 for tax year 2010 (SOR 
¶ 1.f); and $4,965.54 for tax year 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.g.). He testified that he incurred the 
delinquent Federal tax debt because his wife failed to have taxes deducted from her pay 
check. He testified that he failed to file his Federal income tax returns from 2009 to 
2011. The Internal Revenue Service filed substitute returns on his behalf. He testified 
that when he eventually filed his own returns, he was owed refunds and the delinquency 
was eliminated. He failed to produce documentation to support his claims. (Tr. 38-41.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he has filed all of his delinquent tax returns. He indicated 
that his 2009 through 2015 Federal income tax returns were filed in late June of 2016. 
He failed to provide documentation to support this claim. (Tr. 19, 36, 42.) 
 
 Applicant provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses. 
He did not provide a copy of his earnings statement. I am unable to assess his current 
financial status and his ability or willingness to repay his past-due debts, without more 
information on his debt to income ratio. The record lacks any evidence of credit or 
financial counseling. (Tr. 67-69.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
4 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He failed to document he 
resolved any of his delinquencies. Further, he failed to file his 2012 Federal Income tax 
returns as required by law. The evidence raises security concerns under all of these 
disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing.  All of Applicants delinquent accounts 
remain unresolved. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to his separation from his wife and to 
spending beyond his means. While separation from his wife is a circumstance beyond 
his control, he should have exercised financial restraint instead of spending beyond his 
means. Additionally, he failed to establish that he has acted reasonably or responsibly 
with respect to his debts which have been delinquent for a number of years. He has not 
demonstrated that he addressed his debts in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  Applicant 
served honorably in the Navy. However, Applicant’s debts remain largely unresolved. 
While he was given the opportunity to document the current status of his debts, he 
failed to produce evidence of any actions on his delinquent accounts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
