 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
         )  ISCR Case No. 15-00647 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for foreign influence 
under Guideline B and foreign preference under Guideline C. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for her employment 
with a defense contractor. (Item 6) On October 19, 2012, Applicant was interviewed by 
a security investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). (Item 7) After 
reviewing the results of the interview, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make 
the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On August 27, 2015, 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
foreign influence under Guideline B and foreign preference under Guideline C. (Item 1) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 25, 2015, admitting all allegations 
under both guidelines with explanation. She elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on March 18, 2016. (Item 10) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on March 21, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. She 
provided additional information in response to the FORM on April 24, 2016.(Item 11) I 
was assigned the case on December 2, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the PSI to make it clear and accurate, and could 
object to the admission of the PSI as not authenticated by a Government witness. She 
was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the PSI, the Administrative 
Judge could determine that she waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI. In 
her reply to the FORM, Applicant did not raise any objection to consideration of the PSI. 
Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. Applicant was born in Iran in January 1955 and is 62 years old. She 
came to the United States in January 1982, and became a United States citizen in 
September 2000. She graduated from high school in Iran in 1974 and received an 
associate’s degree from a school in the United States in May 1994. She has been 
employed as a quality control engineer by a defense contractor since June 2008. Prior 
to working for the defense contractor, she was unemployed from November 2007 until 
June 2008 after being laid off from a private company as a quality control technician 
where she had worked since September 2000. Applicant married her husband in 
October 1979, and they have three grown children. Her husband and children were all 
born in Iran but are now United States citizens. (Item 6, EQIP, dated September 10, 
2012; Item 7, PSI, dated October 19, 2012)  
 
 Applicant received a U.S. passport in December 2001. It was reissued in March 
2012, and is due to expire in March 2022. Applicant also has an Iranian passport first 
issued in approximately 1980. It was last renewed in June 2012, and is due to expire in 
May 2017. She made trips to Iran in 2000, 2005, 2007, and 2012 using her Iranian 
passport to enter and exit Iran. She uses her U.S. passport to reenter the United States. 
She maintains her Iranian citizenship and passport to enter Iran to visit her parents. Iran 
 
3 
 
 
does not recognize dual citizenship of people born in Iran, so her Iranian passport 
permits her to enter and exit Iran without issue.  
 
 Applicant’s husband and children were born in Iran and are naturalized citizens 
of the United States. They all reside in the United States but are considered dual 
citizens with Iran and the United States. They all hold both Iranian and U.S. passports, 
and have used the Iranian passports in the past to enter and exit Iran. (Item 7, PSI at 1) 
 
Applicant admits that her mother, father, four brother and a friend are citizens 
and residents of Iran. Both parents are elderly. Her father served in the Iranian Air Force 
for 25 years and retired over 30 years ago. Her mother was a civilian employee of the 
Iranian Army for 20 years and retired over 30 years ago. Applicant has contact with 
them about once a month, and stays with them when she visits Iran. One of her 
brothers is a retired employee of the Iranian education department; another is an 
employee of a foreign automobile company; her third brother is retired from the Iranian 
A 
rmy; and her fourth brother works for an unknown company. She has contact 
with her siblings about once a year by telephone during holidays, and in person when 
she visits Iran. Her husband has a friend who is a citizen and resident of Iran. She or 
her husband have contact with the friend by telephone about two or three times a year. 
They visit the friend when they travel to Iran. (Item 8) 
 
Applicant traveled to Iran when her mother had knee surgery, when her sister 
passed away, and when her father had a stroke and was partially paralyzed. Her 
husband also visited Iran when his brother passed away. Applicant believes that it is 
important for her children to visit her parents. (Item 2)  
 
Iran is a country that has been hostile to the United States since the 1979 
revolution that overthrew the former pro-western government. Iran’s support for terrorist 
groups has long concerned the United States. Iran’s human rights practices are also a 
concern for the United States. The Iranian theocratic government has repressed its 
people, pursued weapons of mass destruction, initiated a nuclear program that may 
include nuclear weapons, and continues to support terrorism in Iraq and around the 
world. Iran is known to conduct intelligence operations and economic espionage against 
the United States. There is no direct evidence in the record concerning Iranian 
espionage activity towards or within the United States, but this hostile relationship 
supports the inference that Iran would seek to damage or counter United States military 
capabilities by seeking to obtain classified or sensitive information when possible. The 
United States Department of State warns United States citizens, particularly United 
States citizens of Iranian origin, to consider carefully the risks of travel to Iran. Iran does 
not recognize renunciation of citizenship by those born there, and has detained and 
harassed naturalized United States citizens traveling there. Iran’s continued support for 
terrorism and human rights violations contributed to President Bush’s strong criticism of 
Iran in his 2002 State of the Union message and his designation of Iran as one of the 
“Axis of Evil.” Iran is a nation whose interests are inimical to the United States. (Item 9) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
 
5 
 
 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant’s husband and children were born in Iran but now reside in and are 
citizens of the United States. They possess current Iranian passports which they used 
to enter and exit Iran. Nonetheless, as residents and citizens of the United States, they 
do not create a security concern for Applicant. SOR allegations 2.a and 2.b are resolved 
for Applicant.  
 
 Applicant’s parents, brothers, and a friend have been citizens and residents of 
Iran all of their lives. Applicant has telephone contact with her parents monthly and with 
her siblings at least once a year. She has telephone contact with her friend a few times 
a year. Applicant sees each of these people when she visits Iran every few years. She 
last visited in 2012. Applicant’s family members and friend in Iran are a security concern 
and raise the following Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
 
6 
 
 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has contact with family members who are residents and citizens of 
Iran. Iran has an authoritarian government that aggressively targets and seeks sensitive 
and protected U.S. technology and military information and has a poor human rights 
record, These factors place a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion on Applicant.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
a person has ties of affection for or obligation to immediate family members. Applicant 
did not present any information that rebuts this presumption. These facts show a close 
and continuing contact between Applicant and her parents and siblings that creates a 
security concern. Applicant has telephonic contact with her parents monthly and with 
her siblings yearly. She sees them when she visits Iran. She has visited Iran in 2005, 
2007, and 2012 when there were family medical problems. This level of contact for the 
reasons stated are not casual or infrequent and indicates that Applicant’s sense of 
loyalty to the family members is not minimal. While Applicant has a strong sense of 
loyalty to the United States, the presence of family members in Iran can place her in a 
position to have to choose between the interest of the family members and the interests 
of the United States.  
 
 The information presented by Applicant does not negate the heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of the 
circumstances in Iran and the presence of family members in Iran. Even though her 
family members are ordinary citizens, the situation in Iran is such that anyone living in 
Iran is vulnerable to be exploited, pressured, or induced to provide protected 
 
7 
 
 
information. Accordingly, Applicant has not met her heavy burden to show that her 
relationships with her family members in Iran are not a security concern. I conclude 
Appellant has not mitigated security concerns for foreign influence.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual who acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or 
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) The 
principal goal of the foreign preference assessment is to determine the risk, based on 
foreign associations, that information may be compromised if access to sensitive 
information is granted. It is not a measure of Applicant’s loyalty to the United States. 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran, came to the United States in 1982, and became a 
United States citizen in 2000. She received a United States passport in December 
2001. She has an Iranian passport issued in 2012 that does not expire until May 2017. 
She traveled to Iran using her Iranian passport. She has not shown a willingness to 
renounce her Iranian citizenship. These facts raise the following Foreign Preference 
Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 10: 
 
(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport.); and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
I considered Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligation of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
8 
 
 
These mitigating conditions do not apply. While Applicant’s dual citizenship with 
Iran and the United States is based on her birth in Iran, she has not indicated a 
willingness to renounce her Iranian citizenship since obtaining U.S. citizenship in 
September 2000. Applicant renewed her original Iranian passport and still possesses a 
current Iranian passport that does not expire for a few more months. She used the 
Iranian passport a few times in the past to travel to and exit Iran. Her husband and her 
children also hold valid Iranian passports that they have used to enter and exit Iran. 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns for foreign preference. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The presence of Applicant’s parents and brothers and a friend in Iran creates a 
heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the potential for vulnerability, pressure, or 
coercion of Applicant by Iranian officials. Applicant’s dual citizenship with Iran and 
possession of a current Iranian passport shows there may be a preference for Iran over 
the United States. These facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for access to classified information. The protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated her foreign 
preference and foreign influence concerns relating to Iran. Because Applicant has not 
 
9 
 
 
mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign preference and foreign influence, 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
