1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 15-06023 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jeffrey Moriarty, Esq. 
February 3, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant incurred excessive credit card debt when he used his personal credit 
cards to cover unreimbursed business travel expenses. His alleged debt has been 
resolved either through payment or cancellation. He no longer travels in his new job. He 
uses cash for all of his expenses. His financial problems occurred under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. His past behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On July 25, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On April 16, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 24, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 17, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through O, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record then 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 5, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 63 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
for one year. He has held a security clearance since 2009, in conjunction with his 
previous employment with another government contractor. He is not married and has no 
children. (GE 1; Tr. 19-22, 75.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified three debts totaling approximately $31,588. Applicant denied all of the 
allegations, explaining that these previous obligations had all been satisfactorily 
resolved. (Tr. 7.) The alleged debts were listed on credit reports dated August 1, 2014, 
and July 28, 2016. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant accepted full responsibility for his past financial difficulties. He 
explained that he traveled extensively for work from 2008 through 2010. He was away 
from home for up to four months at a time. His firm did not have corporate credit cards 
and Applicant was required to use his own credit cards and then submit receipts for 
reimbursements. He lost receipts and mismanaged his finances during that time. When 
he realized the depths of his financial obligations, he immediately called his credit card 
companies and closed the accounts to stop the interest from continuing to accrue. He 
attempted to negotiate payment plans with each of his creditors. His mortgage, which 
was past due, is now current. Additionally, he settled four unalleged accounts for less 
than full payment after he negotiated with those creditors. (AE D; Tr. 34-44, 50-54, 63.) 
His debts identified on the SOR are as follows: 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a bank for a credit card account placed 
for collection in the amount of $19,288. Applicant testified he attempted to negotiate 
with this creditor, but the creditor was not willing to accept monthly payments. He 
received a 1099C from this creditor for tax year 2012 cancelling this debt. He included 
this transaction in his income tax filing for 2012, and paid the resulting taxes. It is 
resolved. (GE 2; GE 3; AE A; AE D; AE G; Tr. 23-29, 70.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a bank on a charged off credit card 
account in the amount of $8,815. He resolved this debt on April 29, 2016, after making 
monthly payments to this creditor. The debt was paid in full. (GE 2; GE 3; AE B; AE D; 
Tr. 29-30, 66-67.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a bank for a credit card account placed 
for collection in the amount of $3,485. Applicant testified he attempted to negotiate with 
this creditor, but the creditor was not willing to accept monthly payments. He received a 
1099C for tax year 2013 from this creditor, cancelling the principal debt in the amount of 
$2,991.22. He included this transaction in his income tax filing for 2013, and paid the 
resulting taxes. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; GE 3; AE C; AE D; Tr. 31-33, 70.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his new job no longer requires him to travel. He is 
embarrassed about his past financial problems and has pledged not to utilize credit 
cards in the future. He pays for all purchases with cash or the debit card connected to 
his checking account. He is current with his mortgage and all other accounts. He is 
engaging financial planners to help him prepare for retirement. He lives frugally and his 
2016 personal financial statement shows that he now has $708 left over after he meets 
his monthly obligations. (AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; Tr. 37-41, 
44, 46-47, 49, 73.) 
 
 Applicant is respected by those that know him personally and professionally. He 
presented five reference letters, which indicated Applicant is an outstanding performer, 
a man of great integrity, and extremely dedicated to his job. (AE M.) Applicant’s direct 
supervisor wrote: 
 
I was not aware of any past financial issues until he requested this letter. 
While informing me of his current state of obtaining a U.S. security 
clearance, I asked him a series of questions to better understand the 
situation. He did not hesitate in answering them, in my mind truthfully. He 
again demonstrated his ability to take ownership of his mistakes and his 
truthfulness. His action during my enquiry reaffirmed my earlier opinion of 
his truthfulness. (AE M.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals from 2003, 2006, and 2007 reflect he was a 
valued employee. (AE N.) He has achieved technical proficiency accolades from his 
employers over his career. (AE O; AE P.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to 2010 Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent 
credit card debt. His actions demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and 
an inability to do so. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  Three Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant’s credit card debts were resolved either 
through payment or cancellation. He no longer is legally liable for any of the debts 
alleged on the SOR. These debts were incurred when he was traveling extensively for 
work. He admittedly did not keep track of his receipts or finances during that period, 
which caused his excessive indebtedness. However, when he realized the depth of his 
financial problems in 2010, he closed all of his credit card accounts and began 
negotiating with the creditors. Over the following years, he resolved several unalleged 
credit card accounts. Two of his SOR-alleged creditors were not willing to accept 
monthly payments and chose to cancel the debts, despite his attempts to negotiate with 
them. His most recent credit report reflects that all of his other accounts are in good 
standing. He is now more financially savvy and is saving for his future. He has a new 
job, a positive monthly remainder, and is not required to travel for work. His behavior 
happened so long ago, and occurred under such circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) provide mitigation. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant exercised questionable judgment in the past when he incurred large balances 
on his credit cards but failed to obtain reimbursement for the underlying business travel 
expenses. However, his debts are resolved, and Applicant has learned a valuable 
lesson. He now limits purchases to the cash on hand and does not travel for work. He is 
unlikely to find himself in this situation again. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
