 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02889 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
February 13, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2015, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on or about December 31, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on 
March 28, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on April 15, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 16, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called five witnesses. The 
record was left open until August 15, 2016, for receipt of additional documentation. 
Applicant presented 18 documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A 
 
2 
 
through R. Department Counsel had no objection to AppXs A~R; and as such, they 
were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on June 24, 2016. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Department Counsel and Applicant Counsel both requested I 
take administrative notice of certain facts relating to Israel. Department Counsel 
provided a six-page summary of the facts, supported by Government documents 
pertaining to Israel, identified as GX 3. Applicant’s Counsel provided a seven-page 
summary of the facts, supported by documents pertaining to Israel, identified as AppX 
N. The supporting documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in GX 3 and AppX N. They are limited to 
matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since August of 2014 as a “Senior 
Scientist.” (GX 1 at page 15.) He currently does not have a security clearance. He is 
married to a dual-national citizen; and has three children, who are also dual nationals. 
(X 1 at pages 22~28.)  Applicant and his immediate family obtained Israeli citizenship 
during their nearly two-year stay in Israel from August of 2012~June of 2014.  (TR at 
page 87 line 1 to page 90 line 13, at page 95 lines 13~25, and at page 98 line 17 to 
page 99 line 3.) 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
 1.a.  Applicant is a native-born American.  (GX 1 at page 5.)  In 2012, he sought 
and was granted Israeli “citizenship under Israel’s Law of Return” program, “Aliyah.”  
(GX 1 at page 7, and TR at page 107 line 5 to page 109 line 16.)  As noted above, he 
lived in Israel with his family until June of 2014, when they returned to the United States.  
He has since renounced his Israeli citizenship.  (AppX R.) 
 
 1.b.  While living in Israel, Applicant obtained an Israeli travel document (not a 
passport as alleged), which been cancelled and surrendered to the Israeli Consulate.  
(TR at page 161 line 8 to page 163 line 3, and AppX G at pages 1 and 3.) 
 
 While living in Israel, Applicant voted in Israeli national and municipal elections.  
(TR page 132 lines 1~25.)  He and his family also accepted Immigration Absorption 
Benefits from the Israeli government worth about $16,000.  (TR page 96 line 10 to page 
97 line 8, at page 119 line 20 to page 120 line 17, at page 121 line 16 to page 126 line 
18, and AppX Q.) 
 
 
3 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 2.a.  During Applicant’s nearly two-year residency in Israel, he worked for “a 
start-up company, doing R&D (Research and Development).”  (TR at page 126 line 19 
to page 128 line 8.)  He was “the engineering manager,” and his employer did work for 
“the Israeli Ministry of Defense.”  (Id.) 
 
 2.b.  Applicant has about 14 friends, as delineated by his very comprehensive list 
found at his Exhibit K, who are citizens and residents of Israel.  His contact with these 
foreign nationals ranges from “a few times per year,” to “very rare.”  (Exhibit K, see also 
TR at page 137 line 24 to page 152 line 12, and at page 167 lines 12~25.)  Six of these 
individuals he describes as being a “work friend.”  (Id.) 
 
 2.c.  Applicant has about seven relatives, as delineated by another very 
comprehensive list found at his Exhibit L, who are citizens and residents of Israel.  All 
but one of these relatives are also U.S. citizens.  (Exhibit L.)  His contact with these 
relatives ranges from “a few times per year,” to “rare.”  (Id., see also TR at page 152 line 
13 to page 156 line 21, and at page 168 lines 1~12.)  One of his dual-national relatives 
is the “Chief Archivist at the Israel State Archives.”  (Exhibit L.)  Applicant contacts this 
60 or so year old “2nd cousin” (Applicant is unsure of his exact age), “one or two times 
per year by email; once every 1 or 2 years in person.”  (Id.)   
 
 I also take administrative notice of the following facts: 
 
Israel remains the leading recipient of U.S. military financing, receiving 
over $20.5 billion since 2009. . . . According to the U.S. Department of 
State, since Israel was founded in 1948 it has become and remains 
America’s most reliable partner in the Middle East. . . . The United States 
is Israel’s largest single trading partner. . . . Israel is a parliamentary 
democracy in which the prime minister is head of government and the 
president is a largely ceremonial head of state. (AppX N.)  However, there 
is a significant documented history of classified information and controlled 
technologies being illegally imported by Israel. (GX 3.)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
 
4 
 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
5 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant has a continuing relationship with his Israeli relatives, one of whom is 
“a Chief Archivist at the Israel State Archives.”  Applicant also worked for a company 
that had the Ministry of Defense as a client.  Six of his friends still work for that 
company.  These associations create that heightened risk. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
I find that none are applicable, in light of his continuing relationships, noted 
above. 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
 
6 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country. 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
  Applicant was a native-born U.S. citizen when he sought dual citizenship with 
Israel. He exercised his Israeli citizenship when he obtained an Israeli travel document, 
accepted Immigration Absorption Benefits from the State of Israel, and voted in Israeli 
elections, despite that fact that he was a United States citizen at that time and had a 
U.S. passport. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship. 
 
 Applicant has, indeed, renounced his Israeli citizenship. However, AG ¶ 11(b) is 
not mitigating with respect to this guideline.  Applicant lived in Israel for nearly two years 
as an Israeli, despite also being a native born American, and exercised his rights as an 
Israeli citizen by voting. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is well thought of both at 
work and in his community as evidenced by the testimony of his spouse, his supervisor, 
two rabbis, and a family friend.  However, overall the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Preference 
and Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
