                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------------------- )          ADP Case No. 15-05522   
                           )                                                          
                                                          )
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Driskell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated trust concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility for holding a public trust
position is granted.   
 
History of the Case
On April 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of whether to
grant eligibility for a public trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative
judge to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865
(Exec. Or. 10855), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
1.  A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security,
titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the
Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed  DOHA to continue to utilize DOD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations (to include those involving ADP
I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) Parenthetically, the Directive was designed to implement E.O. 10865.
2
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 23, 2016, and requested a hearing.
This case was assigned to me on October 20, 2016. The case was scheduled for
hearing on November 15, 2016. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the
purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s application for eligibility to hold a public
trust position. At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-
5); Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and eight exhibits. (AEs A-H) The transcript
was received on November 22, 2016. 
Procedural Issues
Before the closing of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with an updated mortgage
statement.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement
the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. Within the time
permitted, Applicant provided an updated mortgage statement covering SOR debt ¶ 1.a
and payment summary concerning a non-SOR debt. Applicant’s submissions are
admitted without objection as AE’s I-J.  
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four debts exceeding
$68,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with
explanations. She claimed she is making monthly payments of $400 and has reduced
the debt to $34,929 as of May 2016. She claimed her debts covered by SOR
paragraphs  ¶¶ 1.b-1.d were charged off.  Addressing her debts covered by  ¶¶ 1.c and
1.d, she claimed she received 1099-C cancellation of debt forms from these creditors. 
Applicant also made general claims about her finances. She claimed she has
worked for her employer for over 12 years and recently endured a challenging personal
financial experience. She claimed she co-signed, along with her 10 siblings, for a new
vehicle for her 82-year-old mother who was in need of dependable transportation. She
claimed that each of the siblings was to make $50 monthly payments to support the
$461 monthly payment on the vehicle, and when they all ceased making payments a
few months later, she ended up assuming the entire bill. Applicant further claimed that
she borrowed against her credit cards to make her monthly credit card payments with
3
creditors 1.b-1.d and got behind with her bills and her mortgage with creditor 1.a. And
she claimed that she has since paid off the car note and regularly pays her mortgage,
utilities, and credit card each month. 
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 52-year-old information security analyst for a medical health group
who seeks to retain her eligibility to hold a public trust position. The allegations covered
in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant has never married and has no children. (GE 1)  She earned her high
school diploma in June 1982 and claims no college credits or military service. (GE 1; Tr.
45-46 ) Applicant has been employed by her current employer as an information
security analyst since February 2005 and maintains a good reputation with her
supervisor. 
Finances
Prior to 2007, Applicant enjoyed good credit. (GE 2; Tr. 47) She experienced
adverse financial circumstances in 2007. (GEs 1-5) That year, she and her 10 siblings
co-signed for a new vehicle for her mother (age 82), who needed good transportation
for her volunteer work. (Tr. 29-30) Applicant’s credit reports establish that she and her
siblings co-signed for a vehicle in July 2007 for $21,231. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 30) The loan on
this vehicle was sold to another lender in March 2010 and was eventually paid off by
Applicant with her credit cards, albeit without any assistance from her siblings. (GEs 2-
5; Tr. 30-32, 49-50) 
Struggling to make her $461 monthly car pay payments without any help from
her siblings, Applicant also fell behind with her second mortgage. After purchasing her
home in 2003 and financing it with a $367,500 first mortgage, she took out a $50,000
second mortgage in 2006 to finance repairs to her home. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 50-51) Credit
reports reveal that she became delinquent on her second mortgage with creditor 1.a in
November 2010. Creditor 1.a charged off the loan in December 2009 with a balance
owing of $47,529. (GE 4)  
Applicant has since made payment arrangements with creditor 1.a to make
monthly payments of $400. Since 2014, she has made regular monthly payments of
$400, reduced the balance owing on her second mortgage with creditor 1.a from
$47,833 to $32,929, as of November 2016, and restored her mortgage to current
status. (AEs A, H, and J; Tr. 33-39, 51-52) Records corroborate Applicant’s assurances
that she has never been delinquent on her first mortgage that was twice resold to other
lenders. (GEs 2-5; Tr.41-42)
4
The three other debts listed in the SOR are comprised of the following: SOR ¶
1.b (a credit card debt for $9,448);  SOR ¶ 1.c (a credit card debt for $3,617); and SOR
¶ 1.d (a credit card debt for $4,682). By her documented evidence, Applicant received
1099-C cancellation of debt forms on her creditor 1.c and 1.d debts and included the
debts in her filed tax returns. (AEs C-F; Tr. 53) Her creditor 1.b credit card debt (opened
in 2005) was charged off in 2010 (GE 4) She has made no documented attempts to
address this account. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 32-35) She did, however, provide documentation of
paying off a non-SOR debt. (AE I)
Applicant continues to bear all of the care responsibilities for her mother and
without any financial assistance from her siblings. (Tr. 50, 53-54) She has never
received any financial counseling and has no prepared financial budget. However, she
has learned from her experiences and is frugal in managing her finances. (Tr. 59-60,
62-63) Applicant opened credit cards to build her credit and has $2,500 in a savings
account. (Tr. 43-44) Further, she has a 401(k) retirement account through her
employer. (Tr. 56-58) She documented her current payment status with her other
creditors and has no other major expenses. (AE I; Tr.  55-59) 
Applicant spends a good deal of her private time with religious education projects
that involve considerable travel. (Tr. 61) She finds different ways through her church to
“giving back and helping people.” (Tr. 61)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
{privacy] information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
trustworthiness concern [public trust position] and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate [trustworthiness
concerns].” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
5
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect [privacy] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect
privacy information.
6
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Executive Order 10865 that all
[trustworthiness] determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the
applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility.
“[T]rustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of a
delinquent real estate debt and consumer debts over a period of several years
between 2007 and 2014 that she has since comprehensively addressed. Applicant’s
accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts;” DC ¶19(c), and “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply to
Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulated debts covered
in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence,
§ 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts are fully
documented in her credit reports and create some judgment issues. See ISCR Case
03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive
positions.” See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, ¶¶ C3, 1.2,
1.1.7, and C3. 1.2..3 (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation).  Holding a public trust
position involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the
expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the trust position. While the
principal concern of a trust position holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in
cases involving debt delinquencies.  
Although ADP I and ADP II positions are not expressly covered by Exec. Or.
10865 or the Directive, which apply to contractor personnel, historically, the same
principles covering these positions have been applied in Regulation 5220.2 governing
military and civilian personnel. The definitions used in the Regulation to define ADP I
and ADP II positions have equal applicability to contractors covered by the Directive.
Extenuating circumstances can be inferred from Applicant’s many years of
bearing responsibility for the care of her 82-year-old mother without any assistance
from her siblings. Considering the available documented evidence, extenuating
circumstances in this record account for most of Applicant’s debt problems. Fully
7
available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly.” 
Applicant’s payment efforts to date are encouraging. She has paid down her
creditor 1.a mortgage debt, has received 1099-C cancellations of debt forms from two
of her remaining three creditors, and paid off two of her non-SOR debts. Only her
creditor 1.b debt remains outstanding.  MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” applies to
Applicant’s situation. 
Whole-person assessment is favorable to Applicant. She has shown good
progress in addressing and restoring her finances to stable levels and is fully
committed to maintaining her debts in current status. She appears to be well-regarded
by her supervisor and devotes a good deal of her private time to her church-related
volunteer initiatives. Overall, public trust eligibility assessment of Applicant based on
the compiled documentation and her corroborating testimony enable her to establish
judgment and reliability levels sufficient to overcome trust concerns associated with
her accumulation of delinquent mortgage and consumer debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accruals and probative evidence of payments made on her listed
debts, conclusions are warranted that her finances are sufficiently stabilized to grant
her eligibility to hold a public trust position. Favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.d:                 For Applicant         
     
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
