 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02775 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 22, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on three debts, in a total exceeding 
$25,300. Applicant introduced documentation to show two of his delinquencies have 
been resolved. One remains outstanding in the amount of $ 11,152. Applicant has failed 
to present documentation showing that he has addressed that debt. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On November 16, 2015, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
On December 15, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on February 24, 2016. The Government’s 
submission included Government Items (GE) 1 through 4. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on March 2, 2016. He was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant submitted a one-page letter in response to 
the FORM (Reply). The Reply did not raise any objections to GE 1, GE 2, GE 4, and 
they were admitted.1 The case was assigned to me on September 13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He has been employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since April 2013. He is married. (GE 1.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on three debts in a 
total exceeding $25,300. Applicant admitted all of the debts alleged in SOR. His debts 
are identified in the credit report entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 4.) After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to financial hardship. He 
explained in his Answer that his wife, a real estate agent, experienced a decline in 
income during the real estate market crash of 2008 and 2009. (Answer.)  
 
  Applicant was indebted on a judgment entered against him in September 2010 
for the approximate amount of $5,257, as alleged in SOR 1.a. This judgment was 
satisfied as of January 27, 2011. Applicant presented a satisfaction of judgment from 
the court to document that this debt is resolved. (Answer.)  
 
 Applicant is indented on a collections account in the approximate amount of 
$11,152, as alleged in SOR 1.b. In his Reply, Applicant indicated he attempted to 
contact this creditor on March 4, 2016, to work out a payment plan. After a series of 
phone calls, he reached the creditor currently holding the debt, and offered to settle the 
account for a payment of $3,000. He did not provide documentation to show if the offer 
was accepted or if any payments were made to this creditor. This debt remains 
unresolved. (Reply.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collections account in the approximate amount of 
$8,893, as alleged in SOR 1.c. Applicant’s October 2014 credit report reflected that 
Applicant disputed this account. He presented a letter from this creditor that it “has 
notified the three major credit-reporting agencies to delete any reference to” this 
                                                          
1GE 3 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an 
unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management in 
December 2014. Applicant did not adopt it as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. 
 
3 
 
account. Department Counsel conceded that this debt was paid off in April 2015. 
(FORM; Answer.) It is resolved. 
 
 Applicant provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses. 
He did not provide a copy of his earnings statement. Without this or similar information, I 
am unable to assess his current financial status and his ability or willingness to repay 
his remaining past-due debt. The record lacks any evidence of credit or financial 
counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit report 
in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He has been unable or unwilling to 
address his largest delinquency. The evidence raises security concerns under both of 
these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Applicant’s largest delinquent 
account remains unresolved, despite the satisfaction of two smaller debts. He failed to 
present evidence to show that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant explained that his financial delinquencies were caused by a decline in 
his wife’s income as a result of the collapse of the real estate market in 2008 and 2009. 
These are factors beyond Applicant’s control. However, to be fully applicable, Applicant 
must also establish that he has acted responsibly. He has not demonstrated that he 
addressed his remaining debt in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not 
been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there is no  
evidence that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. While he 
did resolve two accounts, the largest remained unresolved at the close of the record. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of a dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
provided evidence showing that he disputed the debt alleged in SOR 1.c, after payment, 
and that debt was deleted from his credit reports. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to SOR subparagraph 1.c only. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
resolved two of three debts. However he remains indebted on an $11,152 debt.  His 
failure to resolve that debt precludes a finding that he has the good judgment and 
reliability needed to hold a security clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
