 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07248 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Iraq. His immediate family members are residents and 
citizens of Iraq. He was terminated from an employment position in Iraq, and 
subsequently falsified information about it during an investigation. Security concerns 
raised under the foreign influence, personal conduct, and criminal conduct guidelines 
are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under the guidelines for 
foreign influence, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 31, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 6, 2016, and issued a Notice 
of Hearing on October 19, 2016. The hearing convened on November 15, 2016, as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through FF into 
evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on November 23, 2016. The record remained open until December 16, 
2016, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant did not 
provide any additional exhibits. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq. 
(HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request, and Department Counsel’s request was 
granted. (Tr. 16.) In a timely post-hearing submission, Department Counsel provided the 
five supporting documents mentioned in the Department’s Administrative Notice 
request. Those documents show detail and context for the facts contained in said 
request. Applicant acknowledged receipt of those documents and filed no objection to 
those documents. They are admitted as attachments of HE 1. Applicant’s email is 
marked as HE 2. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the facts alleged in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR. He 
denied the allegation contained in Paragraph 3 the SOR. (Answer.) Those admissions 
are incorporated into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 35 years old and divorced since 2014. He was born in Iraq and 
attended high school there. He earned a bachelor’s degree from an Iraqi university in 
September 2003. After graduating from college, he began working for the U.S. forces in 
Iraq. He worked with them until September 2008, when he immigrated to the United 
States on a special immigration visa and received a resident green card. (Tr. 16-19.) In 
June 2009, he married a U.S. citizen. He became a U.S. citizen in July 2010. He and his 
wife separated in February 2011 and subsequently divorced. (Tr. 22; GE 1.) 
 
In November 2009, Applicant joined the U.S. Army Reserves as a linguist. After 
finishing basic training, he deployed to the Middle East. He remained in the Army on 
active duty until February 2011, when he was medically discharged at the paygrade E-
4. He later returned to Iraq and worked for a private American security company until 
February 2013, when he returned to the United States. 
 
After finding an employment position with a defense contractor (DOD-C) and 
obtaining an interim security clearance, he returned to Iraq.1 He worked there between 
May and June 2013. Upon arrival in Iraq, he received a U.S. Mission Iraq badge (blue 
badge), which gave him access to classified areas on base. At the end of June 2013 
Applicant’s employer notified him that his clearance was suspended, and he was 
terminated from his position. He did not relinquish his blue badge upon his termination. 
He was then sent back to the United States. He remained in the U.S. for a short time, 
                                            
1 Applicant submitted his first security clearance application (SCA) (GE 2) in May 2009. He submitted a 
second SCA (GE 1) in April 2013. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and then returned to Iraq to live with his family for a couple months. (Tr. 19-25; GE 3, 5; 
AE B.)  
 
After returning to the United States, Applicant was unemployed for two months 
before obtaining a position with a Department of State contractor (DOS-C). He received 
a moderate risk public trust clearance. In September 2013, DOS-C sent him to Iraq to 
work at the U.S. embassy. While there, he was issued a DOS “yellow” badge, which 
was a lower level access badge than the blue badge.2 He worked for DOS-C until 
March 2014, when his employer terminated him after an investigation, further described 
below. Upon being terminated, Applicant flew from Iraq to another country for a vacation 
and then returned to Iraq to live with his family. He stayed in Iraq for a year and worked 
for a local company.  
 
In February 2015, Applicant returned to United States, stayed until March 2015, 
and went back to Iraq for a month. He returned to the United States in April 2015, and 
then left for Iraq in May 2015 and stayed another month. In June 2015, he returned to 
the United States. In July 2015, Applicant obtained a position with a British firm and 
returned to Iraq. He currently works for that firm in Iraq and resides there with his 
family.3 Prior to arriving in the United States for this hearing, he had not been in the 
United States since July 2015. (Tr. 26-34.)  
 
Applicant does not have any family members in the United States, other than his 
former wife. He does not own any real property in the United States, but does have a 
small U.S. bank account. He has an inactive bank account in Iraq. He receives his 
salary in cash. (Tr. 34-36.)  
 
Applicant’s mother, father, and twin brothers are citizens and residents of Iraq. 
His mother is a homemaker and his father retired from a position with an Iraqi ministry in 
2006. His brothers live with their parents. One is in college and the other works for a 
gym. He saw his parents a month ago when they visited him in the Green Zone. He 
sees them every three or four months, and usually contacts them by email or Skype. He 
has other relatives in Iraq, but does not have much contact with them. He helps his 
family financially. Last year he gave them about $8,000 for an emergency. (Tr. 36-40.) 
 
As stated, after an investigation, Applicant was terminated in March 2014 by 
DOS-C for multiple and repeated violations of U.S. Mission Iraq policies. The 
investigative report found the following: 
 
(1) Applicant made false statements to DOS investigators regarding his efforts to 
access areas without proper authorization while working for DOD; 
 
                                            
2According to Applicant, a blue badge required a security clearance and gave a holder access to access 
to all areas on the base, including classified buildings. A yellow badge gave a holder access to all general 
areas, but not classified areas. 
 
3Department Counsel confirmed that another DOD contractor is sponsoring Applicant for a security 
clearance.  
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(2) Applicant misused and wrongfully possessed a blue badge, after his secret 
security clearance was suspended, and he was terminated by DOD-C;   
 
(3) Applicant left the compound for personal business without a protective 
security escort while working for DOD; and  
 
(4) Applicant took photographs without authorization while working for DOD. (GE 
5.) 
 
During the above investigation, Applicant told an investigator that he did not 
return the blue badge to his employer, DOD-C, after being terminated in June 2013 
because he thought he needed it to leave the base’s heliport in order to get to the main 
airport. He also said his employer did not have a checkout policy. When asked why he 
did not return the blue badge when he started his position with DOS-C, Applicant said 
he forgot to return it, and then said he did not know where to return it. Applicant initially 
denied that he ever used the blue bade after he was terminated in June 2013, but later 
admitted to the investigator that he used it a few times. He said he used it to enter the 
PX and commissary. The investigator then confronted him with proof that Applicant 
used it 12 times, between July 24, 2013, and August 20, 2013, while he was living in 
Iraq, but not working for a contractor. The evidence also revealed that he used it to 
access an area that required a clearance. (GE 5; AE B.)     
 
In his Answer, Applicant said that he did not intend to mislead the investigator of 
the above report during his interview. Applicant testified that he kept the blue badge 
because it gave him more status than the yellow badge. (Tr. 63.)   
 
Applicant acknowledged that he left the compound three times a week to eat at a 
restaurant a short distance from the compound. He did not request protective services 
because the restaurant was quite close to the compound. (Answer.) He admitted he 
took a selfie picture, which had a base helipad in the background. He said he did not 
realize that the helipad was in the background when he took the picture. (Answer.) 
Applicant stated that he was “profoundly sorry” for all of his mistakes and regrets his 
behaviors. (Tr. 72.)  
 
Applicant submitted numerous awards, certificates, and letters of 
recommendation from military personnel with whom he worked in Iraq before he 
immigrated to the United States. The letters attest to his abilities, hard work, and 
contributions to the U.S. mission in Iraq. (AE E through DD.) 
 
Iraq 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with aggressive governmental action against 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (HE I: Attachments.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns under this guideline are set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;4  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Iraq has significant internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly and 
contrary to U.S. interests. Accordingly, Applicant’s substantial and close family 
connections in that country have the potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
                                            
4The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Applicant was born and raised in Iraq. All of his immediate relatives are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. Since immigrating to the United States in 2008, Applicant has 
returned to Iraq while working for a private American company He resided in Iraq for a 
year while working for a local company there. He currently works with a British 
contractor and resides in Iraq. While residing in Iraq, he has provided significant 
financial assistance to his family for emergencies. His father is a former employee of the 
Iraqi ministry. He has an entirely legitimate, serious interest in the welfare of his family 
members in Iraq, creating the potential for conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has resided in Iraq with his family for 
months between periods of employment. At one point, he lived and worked in the 
civilian community there for a year. The evidence raises a disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 7(c).  
 
  The Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying 
conditions and shifting the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. Three mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the security concerns raised under 
this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
In light of the significant presence of terrorism in Iraq, Applicant did not 
demonstrate that it is unlikely that he could be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual or government and those of the United 
States, due to his ongoing familial relationships there. His communication and contacts 
with his family are neither casual nor infrequent. Accordingly, he failed to establish the 
mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has limited application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established some connections to the United States. In 2008, he immigrated to the 
United States from Iraq and became a U.S. citizen in 2010. He served in the U.S. Army 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
from 2009 to 2011. He has resided in the United States at times. Although these facts 
demonstrate some connections to the United States, his deep and longstanding 
relationships are in Iraq, as demonstrated by his close familial loyalty to his immediate 
family there, and long periods of time when he primarily resides there. He does not have 
any immediate family in the United States.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant was terminated from a 
position in Iraq based on violating U.S. Mission Iraq rules and policies and deliberately 
making false statements to an investigator about his conduct. AG ¶ 16 describes two 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. 
 
Applicant deliberately made false statements to an investigator when he inquired 
about Applicant’s efforts to access unauthorized areas after he was terminated from a 
position in June 2013. Applicant admitted that he misused and wrongfully possessed a 
blue badge after being terminated. He acknowledged that while working on base he left 
the compound for personal reasons and without a protective security escort, against 
regulations. He admitted that he took an unauthorized picture. The evidence established 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16(b) and AG ¶ 16(d)(3). 
 
 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant did not make a prompt or good-faith effort to correct the falsification 
before being confronted with the facts by the investigator. Applicant’s falsifications and 
rule violations were not minor and cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Neither mitigating condition applies.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant made false statements to an investigator and misused an access 
badge issued by the DOD. The evidence established the above disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s misconduct, while working in Iraq in 2013 and his subsequent 
intentional denial of it, do not constitute such unusual circumstances that similar 
conduct is unlikely to recur. To the contrary, he knowingly breached employment rules 
and policies when he failed to return a security badge upon termination, and instead 
continued to use it. His false statements to an investigator about his conduct cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. While he appears to be genuinely 
remorseful about his misconduct, there is insufficient evidence of successful 
rehabilitation.  
Whole-Person Concept 
             
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and 
articulate 35-year-old man. Prior to immigrating to the United States, Applicant 
commendably assisted U.S. Forces in Iraq for a couple years. After immigrating to the 
United States, he enlisted in the U.S. Army and honorably served from 2009 to 2011, 
again in Iraq. These are factors in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. 
 
  However, the factors that weigh against granting Applicant a security clearance 
outweigh the above facts. Applicant was born and raised in Iraq. He graduated from an 
Iraqi university. His parents and brothers are citizens and residents of Iraq; he does not 
have immediate family members in the United States. Between jobs or military service, 
he has resided in Iraq with his family for long periods, attesting to his strong familial ties. 
The most significant factor weighing heavily against Applicant was his failure to comply 
with U.S. Mission Iraq rules and policies during employment, and subsequent to 
termination. Coupled with those breaches was his decision to minimize his misbehavior 
during an interview with an investigator. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
foreign influence, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. 
 
 
  11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:                 Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
