1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-04695 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated December 6, 2015, detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 18, 2015. He denied two allegations 
(SOR 1.a and 1.b) stating that the debts had been paid. He admitted twelve allegations 
and was unsure of the status of the remaining six allegations. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on March 16, 2016, and I was assigned the case on September 7, 
2016. DOD issued a notice of hearing on October 13, 2016, and a hearing was 
scheduled for October 27, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government 
offered six exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-6. Applicant testified and submitted four exhibits that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-D. I 
kept the record open for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely 
submitted three documents that I marked and admitted into the record without objection 
as AX E, AX F, and AX G. AX E and AX G each consist of one page. AX F consists of 
three pages. (GX 7 and 8, e-mail, dated November 28, 2016) DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 47 years old. He served seven years on active 
duty in the Navy from January 1990 to January 1997. He received an honorable 
discharge as a second-class petty officer (E-5). He was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information while serving on active duty. He has been a senior or lead 
systems engineer for defense contractors since 1997. He first married in September 
1995 and divorced in November 1996. He married again in October 2004 and divorced 
in August 2014. He married again in September 2014. He has two children and pays 
$896 monthly in child support taken directly from his pay. Applicant and his wife have a 
family monthly income of approximately $3,400, and monthly expenses of 
approximately $3,127, leaving a monthly remainder of $273. (Tr. 18-28, 43-47; GX 1, e-
QIP, dated October 2, 2014; AX C, Financial Information at 1) 
The SOR alleges and credit reports (GX 3, dated August 25, 2014; GX 4, dated 
November 11, 2014; and GX 5, dated March 15, 2016), and an incident report from his 
employer (GX 6, Incident Report, dated February 12, 2016) confirm Applicant’s 
delinquent debts. There are two judgments for late payment of apartment rent for the 
same apartment for $1,101 (SOR 1.a) and $1,040 (SOR 1.b). There are also a 
judgment for a car repair bill of $1,810 (SOR 1.c); judgments on loans from different 
financial companies for $2,278 (SOR 1.d), $1,911 (SOR 1.e), and $1,995 (SOR 1.f); 
and judgments for medical debts of $389 (SOR 1.g), $290 (SOR 1.h), $713 (SOR 1.i), 
and $190 (SOR 1.j). The credit reports also list a debt for Applicant’s state in collection 
for $3,323 (SOR 1.k); a charged-off debt for $2,370 (SOR 1.l); a charged -off credit card 
debt for $432 (SOR 1.m); an account more than 120 days past due for $2,043 (SOR 
1.n); a debt to a bank more than 120 days past due for $850 (SOR 1.o); a debt in 
collection for $9,531 (SOR 1.p); a credit card debt in collection for $1,514 (SOR 1.q); a 
medical debt in collection for $534 (SOR 1.r); a television service debt in collection for 
$215 (SOR 1.s); and a child support account in arrears for $3,474 (SOR 1.t). The total 
amount of the delinquent debt is approximately $36,000.  
3 
 
Applicant attributes the start of his financial issues to his poor money 
management by not paying his bills on time. He then incurred expenses when he 
divorced in August 2014. Applicant and his ex-wife separated in January 2014 but both 
stayed in their house. Applicant paid the mortgage and living expenses. However, it was 
determined that he was in child support arrears of approximately $3,474 from the time 
he and his ex-wife separated in January 2014 until the child support adjudication in 
August 2014. Applicant experienced reductions in income when his employers lost 
contracts. His yearly pay was reduced by approximately $9,000 in 2012, and then 
$15,000 in July 2016. Applicant’s present wife had surgery in January 2016. She was 
unemployed from January to October 2016 and did not contribute to the family income. 
As noted above, she is now employed and contributing to the family income. (Tr. 22-28, 
47-48) 
Applicant claims to be paying a credit service company $321 monthly since April 
2016 to assist him in resolving some of his remaining debts. They are to resolve five 
SOR debts. (SOR 1.e, 1.j, 1.l, 1.n, and 1.p) The company is also resolving four non-
SOR debts. (AX C, Client Worksheet) Applicant initially expected to resolve the debts in 
three to five years. Applicant presented an unexecuted service agreement with the 
financial service company (AX C, Client’s Worksheet). Applicant did not present any 
information to verify that he has and is paying the fees associated with the account. 
Applicant also claims that based on his present financial situation he requested the 
company to reduce his monthly payment. He has not received a reply to his request. If 
the company reduces his monthly payments, he will not resolve these debts for a few 
more years. Other than his testimony and unexecuted documents, Applicant did not 
presented adequate documentation to establish his arrangements with the credit 
servicing company. (Tr. 27-30, 33-35) 
Applicant has engaged the services of a credit monitoring law firm to identify and 
verify some of his delinquent debts. The credit law firm advised Applicant that they have 
initiated action to verify some of his debts. Two of the debts (SOR 1.d and 1.o) are listed 
on the SOR. (Tr. 28-30; AX D, e-Mail, dated October 24, 2016) 
Applicant claims that the judgments for late rent payments (SOR 1.a and 1.b) 
were satisfied and that he is current with his rent. Applicant provided documents that the 
judgments at SOR 1.a and 1.b were paid through garnishment. Department Counsel 
agreed the judgments were satisfied. (Tr. 12-19; AX A, Lien Adjustment, dated April 26, 
2016) 
The judgment at SOR 1.c to an auto repair shop was initially being paid by 
garnishment. Applicant claims that he now makes payments directly to the creditor, and 
that he has only two payment remaining to satisfy the debt. He did not present any 
documents at the hearing or post-hearing to verify his claim that he made payments 
directly to the auto repair shop. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 29-31) 
Applicant contacted the creditor for the juddgment at SOR 1.d to arrange a 
payment plan. The debt at SOR 1.o is part of the overall debt at SOR 1.d. Applicant 
agrees that he owes a debt but is not sure of the amount of the debt. He offered to pay 
4 
 
$100 a month on the debt but the plan was rejected. Applicant asked the credit 
monitoring law firm to negotiate a payment plan. There is no agreed plan to pay the 
judgment. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 31-33) 
Applicant claims that the debt at SOR 1.f was paid by garnishment during the 
time he was employed by a former employer. He is unable to obtain information from his 
former employer to verify that he paid the garnishment. He did not provide any 
documents from the creditor that the debt is resolved. There is insufficient 
documentation to establish that the debt is resolved. (Tr. 34)  
Applicant admits that the judgments at SOR 1.g and 1.i are not paid or resolved, 
and that he has not contacted the creditors concerning the judgments. Applicant 
contacted the creditor for the judgment at SOR 1.h, but the creditor had no information 
concerning the debt and could not verify that Applicant owed the debt. This judgment at 
SOR 1.h is resolved for Applicant. (Tr. 35-36)  
The debts at SOR 1.k and 1.t are the same debts for child support arrears. 
Applicant provided sufficient documents from the state that the arrears have been 
resolved through garnishment. Applicant is current with his monthly child support 
payments of $896, which are deducted directly from his salary. (Tr. 16-19. AX B, Letter, 
dated January 28, 2016)  
Applicant indicated that the credit card debt at SOR 1.m was paid. However, he 
provided no documents to verify his claim. Applicant has not contacted the creditor for 
the debt at SOR 1.q to reach a settlement agreement. The credit monitoring law firm is 
working to verify the debt at SOR 1.r. SOR debts 1.m. 1.q, and 1.r have not been 
resolved. (Tr. 37-38; AX C)  
Applicant claims to have paid the debt at SOR 1.s. He received a settlement 
proposal from the creditor to settle the debt for $150.54. He claims to have provided a 
post-dated check to pay the debt. However, he did not provide sufficient documentation 
to establish that he made the settlement payment as he claims. (AX E, Letter, dated 
November 10, 2016; AX F Spreadsheet, undated) 
One of Applicant’s former employers provided a letter of recommendation. She 
has known Applicant for over 12 years. Applicant worked for her on numerous projects. 
He was reliable and trustworthy with an excellent work ethic. He worked hard and had 
excellent abilities. Applicant is a person of good moral character respected by his 
superiors and peers. (AX G, Letter, dated November 7, 2016) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. A 
financially irresponsible person may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in 
his or her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
6 
 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
Applicant started experiencing financial problems because of his poor money 
management and not paying his debts on time. He then incurred debt because of his 
divorce and the requirement to pay child support. Applicant’s financial history and 
delinquent debts are sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 
19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The evidence indicates both an 
inability and an unwillingness to satisfy debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happens so long ago, was so infrequent, or  occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, untrustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, 
recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
Applicant’s financial problems started by his poor money management exacerbated by 
divorce, child support, unemployment of his wife, and pay reductions. These 
circumstances could happen in the future. While the divorce and pay reductions were 
conditions beyond his control, the underlying reason for his delinquent debt was his 
poor money management in not paying his debts on time. These events did not occur 
under unusual circumstance and were not largely beyond his control. Applicant did not 
provide information that he has or is receiving financial counseling.  
 
For a good-faith effort under AG ¶ 20(d), there must be an ability to repay the 
debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good faith 
means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence 
to duty and obligation. Applicant must show a systematic method of handling debts, and 
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A track record of debt payment 
7 
 
can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through 
payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for paying debts 
in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner. Applicant must 
establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant did not establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve his financial 
problems. Applicant claims to have a working relationship with a credit-servicing 
company to assist him in resolving his debts. The information Applicant presented was 
his own testimony and unexecuted documents. Applicant’s testimony on his plans is not 
credible. He presented no independent reasonable evidence that he has an established 
ongoing plan to resolve his financial issues.  
 
Applicant has not established that he has a track record of debt payment. 
Applicant paid some of his delinquent debts through the involuntary actions of 
garnishment or funds taken directly from his salary. He has not shown that he paid any 
of his debts through his own payment actions. The payment of debt solely through 
judgments and garnishment does not establish good faith. Applicant has not shown that 
he is managing his personal financial obligations by reasonable and responsible 
financial actions, and that his financial problems are behind him. Applicant has not 
presented evidence of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliability. Based on all 
of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security 
concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s five years of 
8 
 
active Navy service and his over 10 years as a senior network engineer. Applicant 
incurred delinquent debt from poor money management and expenses incurred by 
divorce and requirement to pay child support. Applicant presented insufficient 
information to establish that he took personal reasonable and responsible actions to pay 
his delinquent debts. The debts paid were through involuntary garnishment actions and 
not personal affirmative planned actions by Applicant. There is not clear evidence that 
Applicant can and will responsibly manage his financial obligations. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security concerns arising under the 
financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINSTAPPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.g  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant (duplicate debt) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.p – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.t:   For Applicant (duplicate debt) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
