 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00019 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
July 1, 2014. On October 15, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on February 22, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 26, 2016, but did not submit 
a response. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2016. The Government’s 
exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 5) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on 17 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $19,000. He is 30 years old and has been employed by a defense 
contractor since 2014. He also works as an aircraft technician in the Air National Guard. 
He was unemployed from December 2011 to December 2012.3 He served in the Army 
National Guard from 2012 to approximately 2015, where he noted in his Answer that he 
transferred into the Air National Guard.4 He has been married since 2012 and has four 
children. He completed high school with a GED diploma in 2011. 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, and ¶¶ 1.h – 1.p. He denied ¶¶ 
1.f – 1.g (duplicates), 1.h and 1.i (duplicates), and 1.q. He provided explanations with 
each of his answers. He generally noted that he intended to contact his creditors in the 
admitted allegations to arrange payment plans or to pay the debts in full. He noted that 
the child support and state tax debt allegations he denied (¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.q), were 
satisfied with his 2014 income tax refund and that he was going to dispute the collections 
for an apartment lease termination (¶¶ 1.h and 1.i). The resolved debts no longer appear 
on his credit report. 
 
The record evidence and Applicant’s Answer support the SOR allegations. There 
is sufficient evidence to support Applicant’s contention that ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i are duplicates, 
and ¶¶ 1.f and 1.q have been paid. No evidence has been submitted showing any of the 
remaining debts have been satisfied. 
 
 In Applicant’s 2015 Answer to the SOR, he requested additional time to resolve 
debts or arrange payment plans. He noted that he accumulated debts because of his 
previous debt-to-income ratio, but that has been rectified with his current employment. 
He previously worked largely minimum-wage jobs or had periods of unemployment, and 
could not generate sufficient income to meet the needs of his family. He had to choose 
between paying rent and utilities against paying other debts. He believes he is on a better 
                                                     
3 Applicant’s dates of employment were inconsistent between his SF 86 and his Personal Subject Interview 
(PSI). 
 
4 Item 1, SF 86 and Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
financial path in his current position. However, he provided no documentation of his 
current financial status, budget, financial counseling, or other mitigation efforts. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.5 
The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the 
evidence.6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established law 
that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, 
“the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any 
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will 
be resolved in favor of protecting national security.7 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
                                                     
5 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
7 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred long-standing delinquent debts that largely remain unresolved. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. I find that SOR ¶¶ 
1.g and 1.i are duplicate allegations and that SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.q have been resolved. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts, and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant allowed his debts to remain unresolved for many years before they 
became a security concern. Although he suffered from periods of unemployment or 
underemployment, he has been steadily employed since 2014 in a position that he claims 
is financially superior to his past jobs. He is also employed part-time in the Air National 
Guard. 
 
 Beside the duplicate allegations and paid debts already discussed, the remaining 
SOR debts remain unresolved and there is no evidence of substantial efforts made toward 
their resolution. His financial issues have been long-standing and remain recent and 
ongoing. No credit counseling or budget education has occurred. Applicant has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances to resolve his debts. His overall financial solvency 
remains a concern, and his lack of financial responsibility casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His efforts to date have been inadequate 
to demonstrate that his financial circumstances are under control or that he is willing and 
able to resolve his delinquent debts and meet his future financial obligations. No 
mitigation is appropriate. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant has not provided evidence of resolution of the debts listed in the SOR 
despite the opportunities and time given to do so. Although he claims his overall financial 
condition has improved, he did not follow through with documentary evidence in support 
of his claim or evidence of resolution of any of the SOR debts. Overall, the record leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e, 1.h, and 1.j – 1.p: Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
