 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07832 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David J. Hebb, Esq. and 
James M. Carr, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his finances. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 3, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 12, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant, through legal 
counsel, responded to the FORM on May 9, 2016.  
 
2 
 
On January 19, 2017, I reopened the record to permit both parties to supplement 
the written record.1 Applicant submitted additional documents on February 1, 2017. The 
record closed on February 6, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5. FORM Items 2-
5 are entered into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 2-5, without objection.2   
 
 In his FORM response, Applicant submitted a cover memorandum and five 
attachments, which are entered into evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-F, without 
objection. Applicant’s supplemental FORM response included a cover memorandum 
and two attachments, which are entered into evidence as AE G-I, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts – two credit card debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
and 1.c.) and a mortgage loan account (SOR ¶ 1.b.). After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He received a bachelor’s degree in May 1977. He has 
been employed consistently by DOD contractors since at least November 1985. 
Applicant was first married from 1983 to 2000. His second marriage was from 2002 to 
2008. He has five children, ages 14, 16, 25, 27, and 31.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to his second separation and 
divorce and the nationwide housing crisis. He separated from his second wife in 2006, 
and the divorce proceedings and disposition of the marital home continued until 2016. 
During the separation and divorce, the court ordered Applicant to pay the mortgage loan 
and utilities for the marital home, as well as child support for his two minor children. 
Meanwhile, he was still paying child support to his first ex-wife and for a second 
residence for himself outside the marital home. In 2016, Applicant was awarded custody 
of his two minor children and was permitted to relocate to the marital home.4 
 
 The first credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.a.) was opened in February 2004, and was 
delinquent as of May 2009 for about $4,709.5 Applicant submitted documentation that 
                                                          
1 This order and the accompanying email is admitted into the record as Administrative Exhibit (AX) I. 
Applicant’s February 1, 2017 email and Department Counsel’s February 6, 2017 email are admitted into 
the record as AX II and III, respectively. 
 
2 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are part of the record. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 Response to SOR; AE A; GE 2; GE 3. 
 
5 GE 4. 
 
3 
 
this debt was resolved. The creditor forgave the debt and issued a Form 1099-C in the 
amount of $4,613 for tax year 2012, causing Applicant to incur additional federal income 
tax liability. Applicant paid the additional tax liability.6 
 
 The mortgage loan account (SOR ¶ 1.b.) was opened in August 2005 and was 
$154,874 past due as of November 2014.7 The possession of this home was a 
contentious issue during the divorce proceedings and for several years thereafter. 
Applicant’s initial attempts to sell the house in 2008 coincided with the nationwide 
housing crisis and decreasing property values. In 2010, Applicant’s wife abandoned the 
home in disrepair, and Applicant moved back in and completed needed repairs. He was 
later required by the court to pay his ex-wife back-rent for residing in the abandoned 
home. In 2016, the court awarded Applicant custody of his two minor children and 
possession of the marital home.   
 
 Between November 2007 and July 2015, Applicant attempted a short sale and 
several loan modifications. He provided correspondence regarding his successful efforts 
to modify the mortgage loan and documentary proof of payments in February, March, 
April, and May 2016. In April 2016, Applicant qualified for the Home Affordable 
Modification Program, signed the new loan agreement, and made his first payment 
(May 2016). His January 2017 mortgage loan statement shows that this account 
remains current.8 
 
 The second credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.c.) was opened in January 2006, and 
Applicant became delinquent on the account while going through the divorce and trying 
to resolve the mortgage loan. He resolved this credit card debt in May 2016, through an 
agreed-upon settlement with the creditor.9 
 
 While Applicant failed to provide a monthly budget, his February 2016 credit 
reports list no further delinquent debts and show lengthy account histories with 
consistently current accounts. There is no evidence of any financial counseling, though 
Applicant apparently did consult an attorney about resolving his delinquent debts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c.). Applicant claims that the attorney advised him that the two credit card 
debts were uncollectable due to the statute of limitations. Nevertheless, he went ahead 
and resolved these two uncollectable debts.     
 
 Applicant submitted letters from co-workers who attest to his exemplary work 
performance and strong character. 
 
 
                                                          
6 AE A; AE H. 
 
7 GE 4. 
 
8 AE D; AE E; AE I. 
 
9 AE F. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling approximately $185,436. Two of 
the debts became delinquent in about 2009. Accordingly, the Government produced 
substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
                                                          
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.11 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose from the convergence of circumstances 
beyond his control – his marital separation, protracted divorce proceedings, and the 
nationwide housing crisis. The convergence of these circumstances is unlikely to recur. 
Moreover, these circumstances and Applicant’s persistence to resolve his financial 
indebtedness do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG¶ 20(a) does apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both (1) Applicant’s financial indebtedness 
resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.12 As discussed above, Applicant provided sufficient evidence 
of circumstances beyond his control to fulfill the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not require an applicant to be 
debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously.13 
Applicant’s efforts to resolve these three delinquent debts began as early as 2008. 
Understandably, the protracted and contentious divorce proceedings, coupled with the 
nationwide housing crisis, stymied Applicant’s attempts to resolve his mortgage loan 
account. These efforts, the mortgage loan modification, and the resolution of the one 
credit account (SOR ¶ 1.a.) all preceded the SOR. Upon receipt of the SOR, Applicant 
corrected his misplaced reliance on a tolled statute of limitations by settling the last 
remaining debt (SOR ¶ 1.c.). Since January 2016, he established a track record of 
payments on his mortgage loan account, while staying current on his remaining credit 
accounts.14 Given the concurrent circumstances beyond his control, Applicant acted 
responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts. Therefore, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies.   
 
There is neither record evidence of credit counseling nor a monthly budget; 
however, the two February 2016 credit bureau reports show a track record of other 
accounts remaining current. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
                                                          
11 Applicant does not dispute any of the alleged debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
14 FORM Item 1 (Applicant’s response to the SOR includes two February 2016 credit reports. These 
reports include lengthy account histories showing Applicant’s credit accounts are consistently current.). 
 
 
7 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”15 
Applicant’s debt-resolution efforts predate the submission of his security clearance 
application and the issuance of the SOR. He has established a track record of 
repayments and has taken significant steps towards resolution on all of the alleged 
accounts. Thus, AG ¶ 20(d) applies.   
 
Given Applicant’s established track record of debt-resolution efforts and 
repayments, while encountering circumstances beyond his control, I find that Applicant  
mitigated the financial considerations concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis. Applicant 
identified and documented the circumstances that contributed to his financial 
indebtedness and his lengthy track record of debt resolution and repayments. I 
conclude he sufficiently mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.:   For Applicant 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
