 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ADP Case No. 15-03382 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant emigrated from Iran to the United States in 1976. He frequently 
communicates with his mother and sister, who are citizens and residents of Iran. He has 
retained his Iranian passport and intends to use if for future visits to Iran. Foreign 
influence and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. Applicant’s 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Position (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On March 26, 2016, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 
1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public 
trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. (HE 2) The DOD CAF 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such access to 
sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On April 30, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and he 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On July 26, 2016, Department Counsel indicated she was 
ready to proceed. On August 30, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On October 3, 
2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a hearing notice setting the 
hearing for October 27, 2016. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, the Government provided three exhibits; Applicant offered four exhibits; and all 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 17-21; GE 1-3; Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A-D) On November 3, 2016, I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.).    
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel provided a summary reflecting the facts raising a 
trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s connections to Iran as well as 14 exhibits for 
administrative notice to support the summary. (GE 4; I-XIV) Administrative or official 
notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR 
Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) 
and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 
1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are 
either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). 
Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the proffered documents, 
and Department Counsel’s request was granted. Department Counsel’s summary is 
quoted without footnotes in the section labeled “Iran” infra.   
     
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 2.a. (HE 2) His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a contractor, and the same contractor has 
employed him as a software engineer for 28 months. (Tr. 6, 8, 22) His current annual 
salary is about $105,000. (Tr. 38) His net worth is more than $300,000. (Tr. 39) In 1957, 
Applicant was born in Iran. (Tr. 23; GE 1) In 1975, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 
6) In 1985, he received a bachelor’s degree in computer science, math, and 
management from a U.S. university. (Tr. 6-7) He has taken database and information 
technology courses at various colleges and universities. (Tr. 7) He has never served in 
the U.S. military or the military of any other country. (Tr. 7) In 1987, Applicant married, 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and in 1989, he divorced. (Tr. 7) In 1997, he married his current spouse. (GE 1) His son 
is 10 years old. (Tr. 8) Applicant has three sisters; one sister lives in the United States, 
and she is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran; and two sisters are citizens and 
residents of Iran. 
 
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference 
 
In 1976, when Applicant was 19 or 20 years old, he emigrated from Iran to the 
United States by himself, and in 1995, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 7, 23) 
Applicant’s son is a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 25) When his son went back to Iran, his son used 
an Iranian passport. (Tr. 26) Applicant used his Iranian passport to visit Iran. Applicant’s 
Iranian passport is valid through 2018. (Tr. 27) Applicant said that he needed to retain 
his Iranian passport so that he could visit his mother. (Tr. 28) In the last three years, he 
has returned to Iran two or three times. (Tr. 28) From 2007 to 2014, he traveled to Iran 
in 2008, 2010, 2011 (twice), 2012, 2013 (twice), and 2014. (GE 1) When his Iranian 
passport expires, he intends to renew it. (Tr. 39) 
 
Applicant’s father passed away, and SOR ¶ 1.a is mitigated. (Tr. 29-30) His 
father held commercial, non-government employment in Iran. (Tr. 29-30) His father 
never served in the Iranian military, and he never held an Iranian Government position. 
(Tr. 30) His mother is a citizen and resident of Iran. (SOR ¶ 1.b) She is a housewife. (Tr. 
30) Applicant communicates with his mother on a weekly basis. (Tr. 35)   
 
Applicant met his future spouse on a visit to Iran. (Tr. 24) His spouse emigrated 
from Iran to the United States about 20 years ago on a fiancé visa. (Tr. 24) His spouse 
and her parents are dual citizens of the United States and Iran. (Tr. 25) Her parents 
mostly live in the United States; however, they also travel to Iran. (Tr. 25)      
 
 Applicant’s two sisters are citizens and residents of Iran. (Tr. 31; SOR ¶ 1.c) 
They are not employed outside their homes. (Tr. 31) One of his brothers-in-law was in 
construction and is now retired, and the other brother-in-law is currently in construction. 
(Tr. 32) His sisters do not have any association with the government or military of Iran. 
(Tr. 33) He communicates with his sisters about once every three weeks. (Tr. 35) 
 
 Applicant does not have any property or financial interests in Iran. (Tr. 37) 
Applicant is a diligent and dedicated employee who contributes to his company. He 
enjoys his work and would prefer to continue in his present employment. (Tr. 44-45) He 
emphasized that he is a loyal and patriotic American. (Tr. 42-43) He and his family are 
secular, and they disagree with the actions of the Iranian Government. (Tr. 44-46) There 
is no evidence that he has any professional or ethical lapses or disclosures of sensitive 
information.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor favorably endorsed a very positive email about Applicant’s 
professionalism, expertise, and diligence. (AE B) Applicant made important 
contributions to a project. (AE B) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Iran 
 
• In January, 2014, the Director of National Intelligence assessed that Iran 
and North Korea are unpredictable actors in the international arena. Their 
development of cyber espionage or attack capabilities might be used in an 
attempt to either provoke or destabilize the United States or its partners.  
 
• In February 2015, the Director of National Intelligence assessed that Iran 
very likely values its cyber program as one of many tools for carrying out 
asymmetric but proportional retaliation against political foes, as well as a 
sophisticated means of collecting intelligence.  
 
•  Iranian actors have been implicated in the 2012-13 [Distributed Denial of 
Service] (DDOS) attack against US financial institutions and in the 
February 2014 cyber attack on the Las Vegas Sands casino company. 
Iran used cyber espionage, propaganda, and attacks in 2015 to support its 
security priorities, influence events, and counter threats-including against 
US allies in the region.  
 
• Iran’s intelligence and security services continue to view the United States 
as a primary threat and have stated publicly that they monitor and counter 
US activities in the region. In December 2014, computer security experts 
reported that members of an Iranian organization were responsible for 
computer operations targeting US military, transportation, public utility, 
and other critical infrastructure networks.  
 
• The current Iranian government still has not recognized Israel's right to 
exist, has hindered the Middle East peace process by arming militants, 
including Hamas, Hizballah, and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and continues 
to play a disruptive role in sustaining violence in the region, particularly in 
Syria.  
 
• Iran has adopted the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and 
will now begin taking all of the necessary steps outlined in the JCPOA to 
restrain its nuclear program and ensure that it is exclusively peaceful 
going forward. Nonetheless, the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA), will continue to investigate if there is reason to believe Iran is 
pursuing any covert nuclear activities in the future, as it had in the past.  
 
• The Islamic Republic of Iran is an ongoing threat to US national interests 
because of its support to the Assad regime in Syria, promulgation of anti-
Israeli policies, development of advanced military capabilities. 
 
• Iran possesses a substantial inventory of theater ballistic missiles capable 
of reaching as far as some areas of southeastern Europe. Tehran is 
developing increasingly sophisticated missiles and improving the range 
and accuracy of its other missile systems.  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 • In Iraq and Syria, Iran seeks to preserve friendly governments, protect 
Shia interests, defeat Sunni extremists, and marginalize US influence. 
Despite Iran's intentions to dampen sectarianism, build responsive 
partners, and deescalate tensions with Saudi Arabia, Iranian leaders-
particularly within the security services-are pursuing policies with negative 
secondary consequences for regional stability and potentially for Iran. 
Iran's actions to protect and empower Shia communities are fueling 
growing fears and sectarian responses. 
 
• In 2015, the U.S. Department of State reaffirmed its 1984 designation of 
lran as a State Sponsor of Terrorism, denoting the U.S. Government's 
determination that Iran has repeatedly provided support for acts of 
international terrorism. 
 
• In 2015, Iran continued its terrorist-related activity, including support for 
Palestinian terrorist groups in Gaza, and for Hizballah. Iran used the 
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force (IRGC-QF) and its 
regional proxy groups to implement foreign policy goals, provide cover for 
intelligence operations, and create instability in the Middle East. The 
IRGC-QF is the regime's primary mechanism for cultivating and supporting 
terrorists abroad. 
 
• A 2015 Human Rights Report reported that the most significant human 
rights problems were severe restrictions on civil liberties, including the 
freedoms of assembly, speech, religion, and press; limitations on the 
citizens' ability to change the government peacefully through free and fair 
elections; and disregard for the physical integrity of persons, whom 
authorities arbitrarily and unlawfully detained, tortured, or killed.  
 
• Other reported human rights problems included, for example: 
disappearances; cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, 
including judicially sanctioned amputation and flogging; politically 
motivated violence and repression, such as beatings and rape; harsh and 
life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities, with instances 
of deaths in custody; arbitrary arrest and lengthy pretrial detention, 
sometimes incommunicado; continued impunity of security forces; denial 
of fair public trials, sometimes resulting in executions without due process; 
the lack of an independent judiciary; political prisoners and detainees; 
ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; 
arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, and correspondence; 
severe restrictions on freedoms of speech (including via the internet) and 
press; and harassment of journalists. 
 
• The government severely restricted freedom of speech and of the press 
and used the law to intimidate or prosecute persons who directly criticized 
the government or raised human rights problems. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
• The government restricted and disrupted access to the internet, monitored 
private online communications, and censored online content. The 
government collected personally identifiable information in connection with 
citizens’ peaceful expression of political, religious, or ideological opinion or 
beliefs. 
  
• The Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat 
U.S.-Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens subject to Iranian 
laws. Thus, U.S. citizens who were born in Iran, who became naturalized 
citizens of lran (e.g., through marriage to an Iranian citizen), and children 
of such persons-even those without Iranian passports who do not consider 
themselves Iranian-are considered Iranian nationals by Iranian authorities. 
Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, 
under Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport 
unless the Iranian government has recognized a formal renunciation or 
loss of lranian citizenship. Dual nationals sometimes have their U.S. 
passports confiscated and may be denied permission to leave Iran or 
encounter other problems with Iranian authorities. 
 
• Iranian authorities have prevented a number of U.S. citizen academics, 
scientists, journalists, and others who traveled to Iran for 
personal/cultural/business reasons from leaving the country and in some 
cases have detained, interrogated, and imprisoned them on unknown or 
various charges, including espionage and being a threat to the regime. 
U.S. citizens of lranian origin should consider the risk of being targeted by 
authorities before planning travel to Iran.  
 
• Iranian security personnel may at times place foreign visitors under 
surveillance. Hotel rooms, telephones, and fax machines may be 
monitored, and personal possessions in hotel rooms may be searched.  
 
• In October 2011, the Office of National Counterintelligence Executive 
reported that Iran has aggressive programs for developing and collecting 
U.S. civilian and dual-use technologies, specifically in one area of 
advanced materials and development: nanotechnology. The United States 
continues to charge and convict individuals involved with the illegal export, 
or attempted illegal export, of restricted and dual-use technology to Iran. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.2, and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concern about “foreign contacts and 
interests” stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s mother and two sisters are citizens and residents of Iran. His mother 
and two sisters have no association with the Iranian Government. He frequently 
communicates with his mother and two sisters. Over the last 10 years, he has traveled 
to Iran about 10 times. He does not own any property in Iran, and he does not provide 
any financial assistance to anyone in Iran.     
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Iran is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood whether an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely 
accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the government is engaged is counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a 
substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship of Iran with 
the United States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Iran do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Iran.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Iran seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of Applicant’s contact with his mother and two sisters has raised the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contacts 
with his mother and two sisters, who are citizens and residents of Iran. Over the last 10 
years he traveled to Iran about 10 times. He frequently communicates with his mother 
and two sisters.    
 
Applicant’s loyalty and connections to family living in Iran are positive character 
traits. However, for purposes of trustworthiness concerns, those same connections 
negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), and Applicant failed to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with 
family living in Iran] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s relationship 
with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interest created 
by his relationships with family living in Iran.  
 
There is no evidence that the Iranian government or those conducting espionage 
have approached or threatened Applicant or his family to coerce Applicant for classified 
or sensitive information.2 As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his 
family living in Iran would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or 
exploitation.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness concerns. It is important 
to be mindful of the United States’ efforts to improve diplomatic relationships with Iran. 
Applicant’s family living in Iran could become potential targets of intelligence agents 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s family living in 
Iran.   
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States and more limited 
connections to Iran. In 1976, he came to the United States at the age of 19 or 20. In 
1995, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. He took an oath and swore allegiance to the 
United States. He supports the U.S. Government as an employee of a DOD contractor. 
He has no investments in Iran. Over the past 40 years, he has been a resident of the 
United States, and through his immigration oath he has manifested her patriotism, 
loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries. He has investments in 
the United States; his spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen; and his son was born in the 
United States.   
 
AG ¶ 6 requires consideration of “the identity of the foreign country in which the 
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens 
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” Applicant’s 
connections to the United States taken together are important; however, there are 
extraordinary risks inherent in his family residing in Iran and in his visits to Iran. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Iran are significant. Applicant 
frequently communicates with his mother and sisters living in Iran, and he visited them 
about 10 times in the last 10 years. Trustworthiness concerns are not analyzed in a 
piecemeal assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. Applicant’s 40 
years of U.S. residence, U.S. citizenship, spouse and son are U.S. citizens, and 
property interests (including his employment), constitute stronger connections to the 
United States than to Iran. However, Applicant’s close relationship to his mother and 
sisters, who are vulnerable to potential Iranian coercion, outweighs his connections to 
                                            
2There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified or sensitive information from an 
applicant before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the United States in trustworthiness analysis. Moreover, Applicant is personally 
vulnerable to coercion when he visits Iran. Foreign influence trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline B are not mitigated.      
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference trustworthiness concern stating, “when 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a) describes one condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case: “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . . . This includes but is 
not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport.” Applicant, who is a citizen of 
the United States, possessed a current Iranian passport. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies to his 
possession of a current Iranian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen.    
  
AG ¶ 11(e) provides one condition that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
as follows: “(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e) does apply to his possession of an 
Iranian passport. Applicant intends to retain and use his Iranian passport. Foreign 
preference trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a contractor, and he has been employed 
by the same contractor as a software engineer for 28 months. In 1985, he received a 
bachelor’s degree in computer science, math, and management from a U.S. university.  
He has taken database and information technology courses at various colleges and 
universities. There is no evidence that he has not had any professional or ethical lapses 
or disclosures of sensitive information.  
 
Applicant is a diligent and dedicated employee who contributes to his company. 
He enjoys his work and would prefer to continue in his present employment. He is a 
loyal and patriotic American. He and his family are secular, and they disagree with the 
actions of the Iranian Government. Applicant’s supervisor favorably endorsed a very 
positive email about Applicant’s professionalism, expertise, and diligence. He made 
important contributions to a project.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.3 
The danger of coercion from the Iranian government or intelligence agents is more likely 
than in many other countries. Iran has had a hostile relationship with the United States 
militarily, diplomatically, and through trade sanctions. Iran has a history of espionage 
targeting U.S. military and industrial secrets. Iran supports terrorist entities intent on 
damaging the interests of the United States and harming U.S. citizens.       
 
The weight of the evidence supports denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s mother and two sisters are citizens and residents of Iran. 
Applicant is close to his mother and sisters; he visited them about 10 times over the last 
10 years; and he frequently communicates with them. He has retained a current Iranian 
passport to enable him to visit his family in Iran. “It is not to question Applicant’s 
patriotism to acknowledge that the record in [Applicant’s] case raises the reasonable 
concern that he could be placed in a position of having to choose between his ties to the 
U.S. and his obligations to his[her] foreign family members.” ISCR Case No. 07-02485 
at 5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008) (reversing grant of security clearance because of Chinese 
connections). See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (reversing 
grant of security clearance citing applicant’s minimal connection to Iran as an 
unmitigated security concern over connections to the United States and strong whole-
person evidence). Applicant should not be placed into a position where Iranian 
government or intelligence officials could coerce his mother and two sisters, or 
Applicant, when he visits Iran, to attempt to obtain classified information.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Foreign influence and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
                                            
3See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
 
