KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence.  Disagreement with a Judge’s
weighing of the evidence is not enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 15-00063.a1
DATE: 02/27/2017
DATE: February 27, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-00063
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 21, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  After Applicant answered the SOR, Department Counsel
withdrew the Guideline B allegations.  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On
October 27, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a Federal contractor.  He has worked for Federal
contractors since 2003.  He married in 1979 and divorced in 2003.  He married his current wife in
2009 and has no children.  He received an associate’s degree in 2005.  In discussing Applicant’s
SOR answer, the Judge stated:
Applicant’s answer to the SOR is ambiguous.  Regarding the Guideline F allegations,
[Applicant] stated,
I was not aware of these delinquencies.  I plead guilty. . . .  Two
months ago I was interviewed by [a security officer]. I asked [the
security officer] to check my credit report and he said it was fine with
a score of 650.  Recently I checked my credit report and it is as you
say.  I do not understand it and am looking into it.  I paid them all off.
Regarding the Guideline E allegation, he stated, “Guilty, as stated above.”  I have
interpreted his answer to say that he paid the debts and was not aware that they were
listed in his CBRs [credit bureau reports] as delinquent.  I have treated his answers
to the SOR as denials. Decision at 2.
The SOR alleges three credit card debts that were referred for collection in total amount of
about $27,000 in June 2012.  These debts are reflected on Applicant’s credit reports of April 2013
and June 2015.  Two of these accounts reflect that the last payment on them was made in 2014.  The
third account reflects that Applicant was an authorized user of the credit card.
When Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) in March 2013, he
answered “no” to questions that asked whether, during the past seven years, he defaulted on any type
of loan or had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency, and whether he was currently 120
days delinquent on any debt.  He did not disclose in the SCA the debts alleged in the SOR.  In his
response to the SOR, he did not submit any documentation that the debts have been paid,
compromised, forgiven, disputed, or otherwise resolved.  He did not submit a response to
Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM).
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant is not legally responsible for the credit card debt in which he was listed as an
authorized user.  This alleged debt was not established by the evidence.  The Judge found for
Applicant on that debt.
2
Applicant’s admissions and his credit report establish the other two credit card debts.  These
debts are recent, but arguably infrequent.  Applicant provided no information about the
circumstances in which the debts were incurred and submitted no evidence showing the debts were
paid or otherwise resolved.  He has not disputed any of the alleged debts.
Applicant’s experience and level of education are relevant in determining whether a failure 
to disclose relevant information on a SCA was deliberate.  Applicant made payments on two credit
cards after submitting his SCA, which contradict his claim that he thought the debts were paid when
he submitted that document.  The amount of the debts, the lengthy period during which the debts
were unresolved, and his implausible and unconvincing explanation for not disclosing them in his
SCA indicate an intentional falsification.  His falsification was recent, not minor, and did not happen
under unique circumstances.
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant argues that the debts were incurred without his knowledge. 
Specifically, he stated his ex-wife incurred them after their divorce.  He also claimed that he
provided this information to a security officer (who is not the one that he discussed in his SOR
answer).  Such information was not previously presented to the Judge and, therefore, constitutes new
evidence that the Appeal Board can neither receive nor consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
Applicant also presents arguments concerning the Guideline B allegations.  Since the
Guideline B allegations were withdrawn, we need not address his arguments regarding those
allegations.  The remainder of his appeal brief amounts to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence, which is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06634 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr.
28, 2016).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor 
of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
