                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-07277           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Dana D. Jacobson, Esq.  
            
             
 Decision
_______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his personal conduct.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On February 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 15, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 17, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on August 3,
2016. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant
relied on two witnesses (including himself) and five exhibits (AEs A-E). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on August 12, 2016.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit the opportunity to supplement the record with ISCR Appeal Board decisions
covering omissions in security clearance applications. For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted ten days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded three
days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with ISCR Appeal
Board decisions ISCR Case No. 03-11448 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 2004) and ISCR Case No.
02-09389 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2004) These decisions were admitted without objection for
consideration as precedential authority. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) was terminated from Company A in
January 2013 due to unsatisfactory work performance; (b) was terminated from Company
B in April 2010 for cause; and (c) falsified his Electronic Questionnaires for  Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) certified in March 2014 by denying termination from either Company
A or Company B and failing to disclose both terminations.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied his termination from Company A,
admitted his termination from Company B, and claimed he will provide information in
extenuation and mitigation. He admitted his falsification of his March 2014 e-QIP and
claimed he will provide information in extenuation and mitigation.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first wife in May 1984 and was divorced from her in March
1985. (GE 1) He remarried in June 1987. (GE 1; Tr. 46) He has two adult children from
his second marriage who are college students. (GE 1; Tr. 47) He has no children from his
first marriage. (GE 1) 
3
Applicant immigrated to the United States in August 1981 and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1992. (GE 1; Tr. 47-48) He has two brothers who
like himself are naturalized U.S. citizens. (GE 1; Tr. 47) Applicant claimed no education
credits in the past ten years. He was trained in Arabic before immigrating to the United
States in 1981 and is confident in his understanding of the different Arabic dialects (Tr.
50-51, 86) He passed his first U.S. linguist test in 2001 and has worked as a translator
since 2003. (Tr. 50-51) While his specialty is Arabic, he is also fluent in French and
English, but not in Farsi. (Tr. 51)  He has held a security clearance since 2004. (Tr. 56,
96-97) 
Applicant has worked for his current employer as a linguist since November 2013.
(GE 1) Between February 2013 and November 2013, he was unemployed looking for
work while doing a few part-time linguist assignments. (GE 1; Tr. 99) He deployed to Iraq
in 2006, where he worked in and out of local populations. (Tr. 55-56) From July 2006 to
October 2006, Applicant worked in Iraq as a translator in Arabic. (Tr. 56) The military
commander he was initially paired with in Iraq during his 2006 tour urged him to improve
his computer skills with Microsoft Office. (Tr. 58-59)  Overall, though, Applicant was highly
regarded for his linguist skills by commanders who worked with him in the field in Iraq.
(AE A) 
Between 2008 and 2009, Applicant worked in Northern Iraq with his military team
chief and with other military team chiefs during the remainder of his tour. (AE A; Tr. 56) In
the language test he completed in October 2008, he encountered problems expressing
ideas and complex sentence structures, but passed his language test that year. (AE D;
Tr. 59)
 Applicant worked for Company A between September 2012 and January 2013.
(GE 1) While employed at Company A, Applicant translated with the same methods he
was trained to use. His supervisor (a female lead linguist) strongly disagreed with
Applicant’s translation methods and prompted his employer to terminate his services in
January 2013 for unsatisfactory performance. (GEs 1-2) Applicant attributed his
termination to his embarrassing his supervisor in front of other colleagues with his
challenge of a particular translation method she favored. (Tr. 69-71) Before his
termination, he was never informed that his work was unsatisfactory. (Tr. 55-67) He
always received positive appraisals for trustworthiness and reliability from military
commanders he translated for in the field. (Tr. 26-31, 60-61) And he followed their
recommendations on improving his computer skills with a completed Windows 7 course in
July 2010, for which he received a certificate of completion. (Tr. 61)
Applicant was employed by Company B in February 2009 as a linguist. (GEs 1 and
3; Tr. 101-106) He worked at this company for almost 16 months before he was
terminated for cause in June 2010 for insubordination. (GEs 1 and 3) In an OPM interview
in May 2014, his supervisor confirmed that Applicant was terminated because he was not
translating his message in Arabic and Farsi correctly according to another linguist
attached to Applicant’s brigade. (AE E) Applicant acknowledged he was not fluent in
Farsi. (AE E; Tr.  51) Applicant was notified of his termination for cause in a letter of April
4
8, 2010. (GE 3) The termination letter he acknowledged and signed for on April 8, 2015,
cited insubordination, general demeanor, and attitude as the principal reasons for his
termination. (GE 3) Applicant’s explanations confirm his disagreements with his Company
B supervisor and provide some support for his dispute of the basis of the cited
justifications by Company B for terminating his linguist services. (GE 3; Tr. 71-76) His
supervisor’s summarizations of his incorrectly translating messages in Farsi provide
corroboration of his employer’s termination for cause. 
Prior to his Company B termination, Applicant was never told by his supervisor that
she was unhappy with his translations. (AE E; Tr. 74-75) In her interview with an agent of
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), his supervisor spoke of her own inadequate
language skills and acknowledged she did not speak either Arabic or Farsi. (AE E, at 162)
Applicant challenged his supervisor’s adverse recommendations with Company B’s
management before he received his termination letter. (AE B) He cited his lengthy service
in Iraq with military commands and the  improvements he has made in his computer skills
and translations with command support. (AE B) 
Applicant’s appeals to Company B management were not enough to persuade
management to retain his services.  One day later (on April 15, 2010), Applicant received
his termination notice. (GE 3) Applicant did not challenge his termination or seek
reconsideration with the company for the adverse separation actions taken. Without more
evidence from Applicant, Company B’s assigned reasons for terminating him for cause in
April 2010 cannot be considered arbitrary or wrongful. While Applicant garnered strong
support for his language skills from field commanders he worked with in Iraq, their
favorable impressions are not enough to discredit the assigned insubordination reasons
for his Company B termination for cause.   
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
In March 2014, Applicant completed an e-QIP application. He answered “no” to the
questions asked of him in Section 13C about whether he had ever been fired from a job,
quit after being told he would be fired, left by mutual agreement following charges or
allegations of misconduct, or left by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory
performance. (GE 1) Applicant admitted to intentionally failing to disclose his involuntary
separations from Company A and Company B out of embarrassment and concern his
disclosures could adversely affect his future employment. (Tr. 94-95) 
In April 2014, Applicant was twice interviewed by an OPM  agent. (AE E; Tr. 69-71)
In each interview, Applicant declined to voluntarily disclose his Company A and Company
B terminations. When questioned by Department Counsel at hearing, he attributed his
omissions to embarrassment and concerns that his disclosures could adversely effect his
job and clearance. (Tr. 69-71,110-112, 116-118) 
Applicant’s stated understanding that his e-QIP and OPM omissions were small in
nature (Tr. 112) are not supported by the evidence developed in the record. Applicant’s
omission involved employment terminations. (2010 and 2013) that are both recent and
5
material to a determination about his continued eligibility to hold a security clearance.
Considering all of the facts and circumstances, inferences are warranted that Applicant’s
omissions were made knowingly and willfully. 
Endorsements and awards
Applicant is well-regarded by his past military superiors who worked closely with
him during his deployments to Iraq between 2003 and 2009. (AE A; Tr. 26-31) Applicant’s
military superior (A), an Army ranger who deployed to Iraq on multiple occasions between
2004 and 2009, worked with Applicant in 2008 and 2009. (Tr. 16-22) A credited Applicant
with performing his linguist duties well without any complaints. (Tr. 28-29) Applicant
consistently impressed A with his linguist skills and cultural awareness. (AE S; Tr. 25-29) 
Other military superiors who worked closely with Applicant on his Iraq deployments
between 2003 and 2009 offered strong praise for Applicant’s linguist abilities and
responsible team efforts. (AE A) Each of these military superiors commended Applicant’s
demonstrated determination, positive attitude, and professionalism in his job and
protecting classified information. (AE A) Military officers who worked directly with
Applicant since 2014 praised the excellent translation work he provided his military
superiors while deployed in Iraq. (AE A) All of these former military officers credited
Applicant with exercising sound judgment and maintaining professionalism. (AE A)
Friends who socialize with Applicant characterize him as a good person and friend
over the years of his close relationships with their families. (AE A) They consider
Applicant and his family to be outstanding people. (AE A) 
Applicant’s awards include the Iraqi Campaign Medal (awarded in October 2006 by
his senior Air Force commander), which recognized Applicant’s contributions and
sacrifices during Operation Iraqi Freedom and his personal efforts in the global war on
terrorism. (AE C) Applicant’s award covered his cited exemplary service from July 21,
2006 to October 21, 2006.
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
6
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Personal Conduct
    The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability
to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate
with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
  By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
7
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s two involuntary terminations from his
employments in 2013 and 2010: one for unsatisfactory work performance and another for
cause, respectively, and for his knowing and deliberate omissions of his terminations in
his 2014 e-QIP and ensuing OPM interviews.  All of these security  concerns are raised
under Guideline E.
Involuntary terminations
Based on Applicant’s two involuntary terminations from his employers (Company A
and Company B) in 2013 and 2010 for unsatisfactory performance and cause,
respectively, security concerns are raised about his trustworthiness and reliability.
Applicant never formally challenged the terminations or appealed the outcomes.
Applicant’s terminations are covered by DC ¶ 16(c), “credible adverse information in
several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under
any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” DC ¶ 16(c)
fully applies to the judgment issues raised by Applicant’s involuntary terminations.
Applicant’s 2013 and 2010 terminations were not all the result of cited inadequate
linguist skills in Arabic and Farsi. He was certified in Arabic and spent many years
imbedded with military superiors in combat zones throughout Iraq. Based on his certified
educational proficiencies and favorable impressions he forged with his military superiors
in Iraq, he was consistently extolled as a valued linguist to his assigned commands. The
evidence supports conclusions that most of his cited failings in his termination letters had
more to do with his reported poor communication skills with his lead linguists that affected
both his work product and standing with his employers. The cited reasons for his
terminations, though, are enough to sustain the terminations, absent more evidence from
8
Applicant as to why his employers were not justified in taking the termination actions they
elected to undertake.   
DOHA jurisdiction over employment issues is limited and is generally confined to
assessing the factual basis of employment decisions for their effect on security clearance
eligibility assessments. Based on the information provided from Applicant and his
employers, Applicant’s explanations are insufficient to refute the factual allegations of his
Company A and Company B employers. Under these circumstances,  no conclusions can
be made that Applicant’s employers’ (Companies A and B) termination actions were
either arbitrary or erroneous.
Mitigation of the adverse personnel actions taken by Companies A and B against
Applicant is available to him. Most of Applicant’s linguist assignments drew highly
favorable assessments and recommendations. With the exception of the adverse
impressions drawn by his senior linguists with Companies A and B, neither of whom could
claim perfected linguist skills in either Arabic or Farsi, Applicant was able to demonstrate
superior linguistic abilities blended with consistently reported excellent interpersonal skills
in his established relationships with his assigned military superiors in Iraq. 
Employing a whole-person assessment, any adverse inferences to be drawn from
Applicant’s cited unsatisfactory work performance with Company A and insubordination
with Company B must be balanced with the positive reinforcements he received from his
Iraqi language certifications and the exemplary service he consistently provided the
military superiors he served with while deployed in Iraq for extended periods between
2003 and 2009. Applicant’s noted achievements include the positive endorsements he
received from his military superiors and service awards he earned. His awards include the
Iraqi Campaign Medal awarded in 2006. His achievements must be carefully balanced
with his involuntary  terminations.  
Considering all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s linguist
services he provided multiple employers while serving in Iraq between 2003 and 2013,
personal conduct concerns over Applicant’s involuntary terminations covered by SOR ¶¶
1.a and 1.b of Guideline E are mitigated.
E-QIP omissions and misstatements
In the process of completing an e-QIP in 2014, Applicant committed multiple
omissions about his employment history. Applicant’s proven omissions of his employment
terminations from Company A and Company B in 2013 and 2010, respectively, reflect
recurrent acts of falsification that cannot be reconciled with principles of honesty and
good judgment. Considered together under all of the circumstances, Applicant’s multiple
omissions reflect knowing and wilful misconduct that raise security concerns under
Guideline E.
One of the disqualifying conditions covered by Guideline E is applicable.  DC ¶
16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts to any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
9
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”  DC ¶
16(a) may be considered in evaluating Applicant’s multiple e-QIP omissions about his
employment. 
Traditional assessments of falsification in ISCR proceedings include considerations
of motive in determining whether particular applicants engaged in knowing and willful
concealment. Both Guideline E and relevant case authorities underscore the importance
of motive and subjective intent considerations in gauging knowing and willful behavior.
See ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)(citing ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See,  generally, United States v. Chapin, 515 F.2d 1274,
1283-84 (D.C. Cir. 1975); United States v. Steinhilber, 484 F.2d 386, 389-90 (8  Cir.th
1973); United States v. Diogo, 320 F.2d 898, 905 (2d Cir. 1963). Put differently, the
Government must be able to negate any reasonable interpretation that will make
Applicant’s explanations about his termination omissions in his e-QIP factually justifiable.
Use of a subjective intent test is not intended to straightjacket either party with particular
words and phrases, but rather to avert definitional traps.
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions and
misstatements were repeated in his e-QIP and ensuing OPM interviews. over a two-
month period and cannot be reconciled with actions indicative of mistake or
misunderstanding. Applicant’s explanations are not enough to dispel inferences of
knowing and wilful falsification of his 2014 e-QIP and ensuing statements provided to the
interviewing OPM agent.
Applicant provided two Appeal Board cases that found sufficient mitigation from
whole-person assessments to mitigate falsification findings that lacked applicable
mitigating conditions under a Guideline E analysis. The cases are distinguishable,
however, from Applicant’s case. In ISCR Case No. 03-11448 at 3-4 (App. Bd. August 10,
2004), the Appeal Board found sufficient whole person honesty in the record to mitigate
falsification findings even without the availability of mitigating conditions. Whether the trial
judge found enough past marijuana use to find the necessary materiality to satisfy 18
U.S.C. § 1001 criteria is unclear. From the record in ISCR Case No. 03-11448, supra, it is
not clear either whether Applicant was afforded an opportunity to provide voluntary
corrections in an OPM interview. 
Similarly, in  ISCR Case No. 02-09389, at 3-4 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2004), the Appeal
Board found no mitigating conditions that could be applied to the applicant’s serious
multiple omissions of drug-related incidents, but was still able to mitigate the applicant’s
falsification findings on the strength of a favorable whole-person analysis. See ISCR Case
No. 02-09389, supra. Whether Applicant was afforded a post-e-QIP opportunity to make
voluntary corrections of his omitted drug use is unclear.
The facts in Applicant’s case are distinguishable from those covered in the cases
cited by Applicant. Not only did the omitted involuntary terminations in Applicant’s
completed e-QIP meet the materiality requirements of United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S.
 These OPM interviews wee not alleged in the SOR. However, they are pertinent in evaluating Applicant’s motives1
for omitting his involuntary terminations in his 2014 e QIP and in making a whole person assessment. See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 12 04554 at 2, Note 1 (App. Bd. July 25, 2004)
10
506, 509-511, supra, but Applicant was afforded multiple opportunities to provide
voluntary corrections in OPM interviews conducted just a month after he completed his e-
QIP.  In circumstances where repeated omissions have been found with the requisite1
materiality, motive, and specific intent, the Appeal Board has consistently found no room
for mitigation under any of the specific mitigating conditions or whole-person analysis.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-15935 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003); ISCR Case No. 01-
12737 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2002); and ISCR Case No. 01-07735 at 3-4 (App. Bd.
June 25, 2002).
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Demonstrated integrity and reliability in a person cleared to access classified information
is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. See
Snepp. v. United States, 444U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). Historically, falsification of a
security questionnaire or a written statement given to an investigator conducting a
background investigation “constitutes misconduct that casts serious doubts on an
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.” ISCR Case No. 01-07735, supra, at
3. Applicant’s fact situation falls squarely within the parameters historically observed by
the Appeal Board and generally cannot be mitigated without persuasive evidence of
overall trustworthiness and reliability.  
Based on the developed facts in the record, mitigating conditions are not available
to Applicant to correct his judgment lapses associated with his deliberate omissions of his
terminations from employment with Companies A and B in his completed e-QIP and OPM
interviews that followed.  MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,”
is not available to help Applicant undue the adverse effects of his determined deliberate
omissions and misstatements. His multiple omissions and misstatements are neither
minor, aged by time, nor voluntarily corrected in his OPM interviews, and they continue to
reflect judgment and trust lapses by Applicant incompatible with holding a security
clearance. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s withholding of
material information about his work terminations in the e-QIP he completed and ensuing
OPM interviews, his explanations for his repeated omissions are insufficient to refute or
mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, are each core policy
concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s omissions of the
involuntary terminations attributable to him are not mitigated under MC ¶ 17(a) of
Guideline E.
11
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted responsible, good-faith efforts to provide accurate background
information to the Government in the 2014 e-QIP he completed and in his ensuing OPM
interviews. Judgment lapses demonstrated in his completion of his e-QIP and OPM
interviews are not surmounted by the positive contributions he made with the military
commands he was assigned to in Iraq for which he was recognized with excellent
endorsements and awards. His positive contributions are not enough to overcome the
negative inferences drawn from his repeated omissions in his e-QIP and ensuing OPM
interviews about his overall reliability and trustworthiness. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.c.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:                   For Applicant
Subparagraph   1.c:                         Against Applicant
                        Conclusi o  n  s   
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
12
  
