KEYWORD:  Guidleine F
DIGEST:  Applicant’s arguments are neither sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record nor are they enough to show that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
CASE NO:  15-03411.a1
DATE:  02/24/2017
DATE: February 24, 2017
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-03411
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 13, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On December 1, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 45 years old, provides consulting services to DoD, and her annual income
is about $140,000.  She has never been married and has three children.  She said she spent about
$100,000 on child custody and support litigation over about six years.  She pays about $20,000
annually for her 13-year-old child’s boarding school.  She has a rental property that at times was not
rented, but recently obtained a tenant resulting in a significant increase in her income. 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling about $17,000.  In her response to the SOR,
she admitted all of the allegations.  Applicant paid three of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and
1.l).  She disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o and provided documentation substantiating the dispute. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, and 1.n are medical debts .  After the hearing, Applicant said
she would pay these medical debts, but only provided proof of payment of one medical debt (i.e.,
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, discussed above).  
SOR ¶ 1.b is a telecommunication debt for which she could not recall returning the
equipment to the company.  SOR ¶ 1.c is a debt to a law firm that she asked to stop representing her,
but the firm continued to represent and bill her.  She did not file a dispute of the law firm’s debt with
the credit reporting companies.  SOR ¶ 1.e is a charged-off credit card debt in which the monthly
minimum raised from $10 to $25 soon after she used the card, and she has refused to pay the
balance.  SOR ¶ 1.f is a collection account from a telecommunications company that she disputes,
but did not provide any documentation showing the debt was resolved or disputed.
 SOR ¶ 1.h is a collection account for $9,816 that arose from a contract to build a deck near
her house.  Applicant claims the contractor dug four holes in the wrong place near her home’s
foundation that caused water issues, including the sinking of a preexisting patio.  She said the cost
to repair the damage would be $20,000 to $30,000.  She did not provide a copy of the repair
estimate.  She offered to settle the debt for $2,500 and the creditor made a counter-offer for $5,000. 
After the hearing, she provided an $2,500 estimate for the repairs that did not discuss what steps a
reasonable owner could have taken to mitigate the damage.  She did not present the original plans
for the deck. 
 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found for Applicant on the debts she resolved (SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.l and 1.o) and
against her on the remaining debts.  Applicant presented important mitigating evidence, such as
information about her child custody and support litigation as well as her unemployment and
underemployment, but she neither provided specifics about how those circumstances over the past
five years adversely affected her finances nor established that she acted responsibly under the
circumstances.  She may be relying on the absence of delinquent debt from her current credit report
to mitigate security concerns, which is not meaningful evidence of debt resolution.  While she
mitigated four of the alleged debts, she did not provide sufficient documentation showing payment
or other good-faith attempts to resolve the other debts.  There is insufficient assurance that her
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future.  
Discussion
In the appeal brief, Applicant states that the Judge “often misquotes or cites facts that are
incorrect or backwards, indicating a confused decision that cannot be considered common sense.” 
A footnote at the end of that sentence refers to pages 4 and 8 of the decision.  Appeal Brief at 5-6. 
An appealing party must state with sufficient specificity what it is about a Judge’s decision that he
or she believes to be erroneous so as to enable reviewing authorities, such as the Appeal Board, to
address the assignment of error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05920 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016). 
Applicant’s appeal brief is deficient in that regard because it failed to specify exactly what facts
were misquoted or incorrect.  In particular, we are unable to discern which facts on pages 4 and 8
of the decision are being challenged.
We note the Judge erred in finding that Applicant admitted all of the allegations in her SOR
response.  She either denied or indicated that she was “unable to admit or deny” most of the  SOR
allegations.1  However, this error was harmless because it likely had no affect on the outcome in this
case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  In the decision, the Judge
individually addressed each SOR allegation.  In doing so, he noted when Applicant was disputing
a particular debt and her reasons for the dispute.  Consequently, the Judge was aware of Applicant’s
position concerning each debt during his analysis of the evidence pertaining to that debt.
    
In the appeal brief, Applicant also states, “there are a number of references to ‘Personal
Conduct’ allegations throughout Judge Harvey’s decision when Personal Conduct allegations were
never alleged by the government.”  Appeal Brief at 2-3.  Our review of the decision reveals one
reference to “personal conduct.”  In the last paragraph of his whole-person analysis, the Judge stated,
“ I conclude that personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations
security concerns are not mitigated.”  This reference to “personal conduct” is an error because, as
Applicant correctly noted, there were no personal conduct (Guideline E) allegations in the SOR. 
However, this error was harmless because its own wording shows it likely had no impact on the
decision in this case.  Id.  
   
Applicant further argues that the Judge did not weigh and consider all relevant evidence.  She
cites to such things as the financial burden of her past custody disputes and her efforts to resolve her
debts.  However, the Judge made findings about those matters.  She also claims that the Judge did
not discuss many of the SOR allegations (Appeal Brief at 12).  Applicant’s arguments are neither
sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor
are they enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015). 
We give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited, but it is neither
1  In a post-hearing submission, Applicant changed her responses from “unable to admit or deny” concerning
a number of the medical debts to admissions.  See, AE P at 8-9.  She continued to deny other debts.
binding precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id. 
Additionally, the Judge complied with the requirements of the Directive in his whole-persons
analysis by considering the totality of the evidence in reaching his decision. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed:  Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed:  James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed:   James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
