1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  Redacted   )    ISCR Case No. 15-03987 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant defaulted on his student loans and on a wireless phone debt in part 
because of a lengthy unemployment. He settled the telephone debt in collection after his 
hearing, but more progress is needed toward addressing his student loans. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was 
unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance 
eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On December 21, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On April 22, 2016, the case was assigned to a DOHA administrative judge to 
conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant a security clearance for Applicant. On May 23, 2016, the case was transferred to me 
because of my jurisdictional responsibilities. On May 31, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for 
July 13, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Six Government exhibits (GEs 1-6) were 
admitted into evidence without objection, and Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript 
(Tr.) received on July 21, 2016. I held the record open for six weeks after the hearing for 
Applicant to supplement the record. On September 14, 2016, Applicant submitted nine 
exhibits (AEs A-I) through Department Counsel, who expressed no objection to their 
admissibility on October 3, 2016. I admitted the exhibits and closed the record on October 
3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges that, as of December 4, 2015, Applicant owed $16,767 in 
delinquent student loan debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a $515 cell phone debt in collection (SOR ¶ 
1.b). Applicant admitted the debts when he responded to the SOR. He indicated that he 
would bring his student loan account into good standing and that he would pay the cell 
phone debt before his hearing. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old painter with an associate degree from a community 
college and some credits toward a bachelor’s degree. Applicant was married from 
September 2005 to March 2008. In March 2010, Applicant had a son by another 
relationship. Applicant was granted custody of his son in approximately November 2011, 
and he has raised his son on his own since then. (GEs 1, 5, 6; Tr. 20, 24-25.) 
 
 Applicant took classes at a local community college sporadically over the years, 
eventually earning his associate degree in 1999. He paid cash for his community college 
studies. (Tr. 49-51.) Approximately 20 years ago, he also took a course at a computer 
processing institute for eight months that he paid for with student loans. (AE I; Tr. 47-50.) 
The school closed down, which led him to believe that it may have been a predatory, for-
profit institution.  (Tr. 49.) 
 
 Applicant worked as a bartender from June 2002 to November 2003. From 
November 2003 to July 2004, Applicant was employed as a laborer for a window 
installation company. He resigned from the job when his employer failed to take action to 
address comments by a supervisor that made him uncomfortable. Applicant returned to 
bartending in July 2004, and he held that job until November 2011, when he resigned to 
care for his son. (Tr. 19-23.) 
 
3 
 
 Except for some part-time income from October 2012 to February 2013 as an 
assistant coach for a high school team (GE 5), Applicant was unemployed from November 
2011 to July 2013 while caring for his young son and fighting for permanent custody. (GE 
1; Tr. 19-20.) He received welfare benefits of $450 a month while he was unemployed. He 
and his son moved from place to place for a couple of months until January 2012, when he 
began renting a room from a female friend. (GEs 1, 6; Tr. 22-23, 27.) 
 
 In November 2012, Applicant accepted a job offer from his current employer, which 
was contingent on him being granted a DOD secret clearance. (GE 5.) Applicant completed 
and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
November 16, 2012. Applicant listed some criminal offenses that occurred more than ten 
years ago in response to the police record inquiries. He responded affirmatively to an 
inquiry into whether there was currently a domestic violence protective order or restraining 
order against him, and explained that the mother of his son had filed an order of protection 
against him two days after he filed for custody of their son in September 2011. He added 
that his son had been with him for almost a year. Applicant responded affirmatively to 
inquiries concerning any delinquency involving routine accounts. He disclosed that he 
owed $16,767 in delinquent student loan debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) because he “was irresponsible,” 
but that he would begin repayment as soon as he was employed. He also listed a cell 
phone debt of $515 (SOR ¶ 1.b) from approximately January 2012, which he also planned 
to repay once he had a regular paycheck. (GE 1.) 
 
 On January 18, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about his arrest record, his custody battle for 
his son, the protective order against him that was still pending in court, and his disclosed 
financial delinquencies. Applicant attributed his default on his student loan and cell phone 
accounts to his unemployed status. He expressed his intent to establish repayment plans 
once he had employment income.  (GE 6.) 
 
  The defense contractor position offered to Applicant was filled while his background 
investigation for security clearance eligibility was still pending. Applicant successfully 
applied for a different position for the company that did not require security clearance 
eligibility. He began working in July 2013 on second shift, so he was paid a shift differential. 
(GE 5; Tr. 19, 29.) 
 
 As of September 4, 2013, Applicant’s credit report showed only two entries. A joint 
revolving charge account with a high credit of $258 and timely payments had been closed 
since September 2007. The only other entry was the cell phone debt of $515 from 
February 2012, which was placed for collection in March 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b). (GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant was re-interviewed by an OPM investigator on September 10, 2013. He 
volunteered that he had part-time income from October 2012 to February 2013 as an 
assistant coach at a high school. He explained that the court had expunged the protective 
order in approximately May 2013, but that the custody battle over his son was still ongoing. 
About his defaulted student loan, Applicant indicated that he did not know the details of his 
delinquency; that the listed $16,767 balance was an estimate; that he probably owed over 
4 
 
$17,000; and that he had yet to make any payments. He indicated that he would likely be 
in a position to contact the student loan lender in October 2013 and establish a repayment 
plan. He planned to apply his anticipated income tax refund toward the debt. As for the 
wireless phone debt in collection, Applicant surmised that the debt had accrued to $600 
because of interest. He explained that he could not afford the payments when he was on 
welfare. He had yet to make any payments toward the debt because he was paying $350 a 
week for childcare. Applicant expressed intent to fully pay the debts. (GE 5.) 
 
 As of January 2014, Applicant’s hourly wage was $17.88 ($16.48 plus a $1.40 shift 
differential). (AE F.) From January 2014 to November 2014, Applicant’s wages were 
garnished a total of approximately $5,000 for his student loan debt. (AEs F, G.) By 
November 2014, his hourly wage had increased to $19.38 when accounting for his shift 
differential. For the week ending November 8, 2014, his take-home pay was $679 after 
deductions. It was the last time that his pay was garnished for his student loans.1 (AE G; 
Tr. 31.) In September 2015, Applicant moved to first shift at a wage of $20 an hour. He 
took home $595 for the week ending September 12, 2015. (AE E.) 
 
 In June 2016, Applicant transferred to another position paying $22.12 an hour. (AE 
C; Tr. 19.) He was repaying two 401(k) loans (AE C) and overtime was less available due 
to a company “slow down.” (Tr. 31, 34-35.) By three weeks into his new job, Applicant had 
already displayed a commitment to completing his daily assignments. Applicant’s foreman 
considered Applicant to be a “welcome asset” to their team. Applicant had demonstrated a 
high level of initiative and enthusiasm. (AE H.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his student loan lender no longer had any record of his 
student loans. (Tr. 54-55.) However, he indicated that he had taken action on July 13, 
2016, toward repaying his student loan debt, which had accrued to $18,000. (Tr. 31, 34, 
46.) He had been contacted by a company about a nine-month rehabilitation program (Tr. 
59-60, 63-64), and he authorized debit of his bank account at $25 per week starting on July 
15, 2016. He explained that he could repay his student loans at as little as $5 a month. (Tr. 
34.)  Applicant expressed concern that the company might not be legitimate, although the 
company was aware of the 2014 garnishment and the amount paid by garnishment. (Tr. 
52-56, 60.) 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay was $530 for the week ending September 3, 2016. (AE 
C.) In a post-hearing submission, Applicant indicated, “I can pay by setting up a $5 a month 
payment schedule. I will pay more.” (AE I.) 
 
 Applicant paid $195 a week for eight weeks of summer camp for his son in 2016. 
(AE B; Tr. 38.) As of September 2016, Applicant’s rent was $800 a month. He was also 
paying $150 a week for before-school care for his son so that he can get to work on time. 
(AE A; Tr. 39.) He also has some afterschool costs, but it varies because some friends do 
                                                 
1 Applicant later testified that “some company” was able to convince his employer that he owed the debt that 
he never acknowledged. (Tr. 57.) Applicant did not know what company initiated the garnishment or even 
whether it was in response to a court order. (Tr. 58.) 
5 
 
not charge him. He had additional childcare costs some weekends when he was working 
overtime. (Tr. 38-39.) His pays $105 per month for car insurance. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 Applicant receives no child support from his son’s mother. Applicant would like to file 
for child support in his state, but he does not know of his son’s mother’s whereabouts. He 
does not have the leave to take time off from work to go to court. (AE C; Tr. 29, 41.) 
 
 After his security clearance hearing, Applicant reached a settlement for the cell 
phone debt. He paid $128 by debit card on September 12, 2016. (AE D.) According to 
Applicant, the creditor accepted payment to fully satisfy his debt, and that it would be 
removed from collections. (AE A.) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
6 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant obtained student loans to attend a technical institute for computer training 
approximately 20 years ago. He listed the student loans on his November 2012 SF 86 as 
having a delinquent balance of $16,676, but he then expressed uncertainty at his hearing 
about the status of his loans, given the computer training institute had closed down and the 
loans are not on his credit reports. Pay statements submitted after his hearing show that 
his wages were garnished in 2014 for his student loans, and he indicated that his student 
loan debt had accrued to $18,000. Available evidence substantiates a longstanding student 
loan delinquency. Applicant does not dispute that a $515 wireless phone debt from 
January 2012 was placed for collection in April 2014. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. 
 
  Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” has 
some applicability in that the initial defaults were not recent. However, AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
mitigate such longstanding delinquency. 
 
 Applicant is the sole source of information about his student loans, and he provided 
little detail about their delinquency history. Applicant told an OPM investigator that he had 
made payments on his student loans when he was employed, but his lengthy 
unemployment led him to default. Except for some minimal income earned as an assistant 
coach from October 2012 to February 2013, Applicant was unemployed from November 
2011 to July 2013 while caring for his then toddler-age son. Applicant has a case for partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
7 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  Applicant cannot reasonably be expected to 
have made payments toward his old student loans when he was struggling to support 
himself and his young son on a welfare benefit of $450 a week. More recently, his income 
has declined somewhat because of a lack of overtime work. 
 
 Even if Applicant’s financial problems arose in whole or in part to circumstances 
outside of his control or were not the result of financially irresponsible behavior, I still have 
to consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with 
those financial difficulties. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan 12, 
2007). Applicant has known about the delinquencies for some time. He disclosed them on 
his November 2012 SF 86 and indicated during a September 2013 interview that he 
planned to make repayment arrangements in approximately October 2013. Childcare costs 
continued to be a burden, and in 2014, his wages were garnished for his past-due student 
loans. It is unclear why his employer ceased the garnishment, but it then became 
incumbent on Applicant to stay in contact with his student loan lender and attempt to 
negotiate repayment. There is no evidence that he made any effort until just before his 
hearing, when he responded to an inquiry about a student loan rehabilitation program. He 
had taken no steps to address the $515 cell phone collection debt as of his hearing in July 
2016. He did not offer a credible explanation for why he could not reach out to the cell 
phone provider and offer small payments in 2015. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” 
has limited applicability. Applicant’s payment of $128 in September 2016 has apparently 
settled the cell phone debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. Inasmuch as he waited until after his July 2016 
hearing to address the debt, it is difficult to give full mitigating weight to AG ¶ 20(d), “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” Even so, Applicant deserves credit for his payment.  
 
 The primary concern in this case is Applicant’s student loan delinquency because of 
its mounting balance to its current $18,000 and relatively recent attempts to collect the 
student loans, including by garnishing his wages in 2014 and the proposed rehabilitation 
program in 2016. They suggest that Applicant is likely to be pursued for the loan balance.  
Applicant expressed a willingness to make payments. The day of his security clearance 
hearing, he contacted a company that had offered him a loan rehabilitation program, and 
he claimed he authorized debit from his account at $25 a week. He knew little about the 
firm and expressed concerns at his hearing about its legitimacy. He presented no evidence 
that he followed through with the loan rehabilitation. His offer of September 2016 that he 
can pay by setting up a payment schedule of $5 a month shows that he had yet to 
establish a payment plan. The Appeal Board has held that an applicant is not required to 
establish that he has paid off each debt in the SOR, or even that the first debts paid be 
those in the SOR. However, an applicant needs to show that he has a plan to resolve his 
debts and that he has taken significant steps to implement his plan. See ISCR 07-06482 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant’s promise to pay his student loans is not a substitute 
for a track record of timely payments. See ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 
8 
 
19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). Neither AG ¶ 20(c) 
nor AG ¶ 20(d) apply to his student loan delinquency. The financial considerations 
concerns are not adequately mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).2 The analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 A determination of any applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance should not be 
made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on a reasonable and careful evaluation 
of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus exists between established facts and a 
legitimate security concern. Applicant candidly disclosed his delinquencies on his SF 86. 
He coped reasonably well with a contentious custody battle over his son, and with the help 
of some friends, he survived a lengthy unemployment without relying on credit cards. He 
incurred the cell phone delinquency during that time, but there is no evidence of other new 
past-due accounts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial situation continues to be impacted by costs of before and after-
school care for his son. He has demonstrated reliability in his new position at work. 
However, he displayed questionable financial judgment by not keeping himself informed 
about his student loans. He could not identify who had sought the garnishment of his 
wages in 2014 and did not know who was holding his student loans as of his hearing. As of 
September 2016, he was not disputing that he owes approximately $18,000 ($7,000 each 
on two loans and $3,600 in fees). He has no record of sustained payments toward the 
student loans from which I could reasonably conclude that they are likely to be resolved at 
some future date. Applicant has not yet allayed the financial judgment concerns raised by 
his handling of his student loans. It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an 
applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990). For the reasons noted above, I am unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
