 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00874 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline H (drug 
involvement). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 18, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On July 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On August 18, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On September 30, 
2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 7, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On May 26, 
2016, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for June 20, 2016. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were received into evidence without objection. On June 27, 2016, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both of the SOR allegations with explanations. Applicant’s 
answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old mobile simulation technician employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2015. He seeks a security clearance as a condition of his 
continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 16-19, 32-33)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1991. He was awarded an associate of 
science degree in 2002 in electronic engineering technology, and a bachelor of 
science degree in 2004 also in electronic engineering technology. He has never 
married and has no dependents.  Applicant has not served in the U.S. armed forces. 
(GE 1; Tr. 19-22) 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Security concerns were identified under this concern following Applicant’s self-
disclosure for past drug use during his background investigation. (GE 1) Applicant 
used marijuana with varying frequency from 1993 to 2014. His marijuana use began 
when he was about 20 years old and decreased over time until he completely stopped 
in 2014. Applicant also used cocaine approximately four times between 1995 and 
2012, the first time being when he was about 21 years old. He no longer associates 
with anyone who uses drugs. His testimony was consistent with his July 30, 2014, 
Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (GE 2; Tr. 
35-45) 
 
 As Applicant matured and witnessed first-hand the adverse effects of drugs, he 
came to the realization that drug use was not compatible with his career or the 
direction he wanted to take in life. He made significant lifestyle changes to include 
stopping drinking, eating healthy, exercising, and losing weight. He is driven by his 
faith and the desire to lead a good and wholesome life. Applicant stated that he is 
involved in a relationship with a “wonderful woman that [he] hope[s] to keep.” His 
 
3 
 
 
girlfriend is a Ph.D. candidate in media communications. She provides “constant 
support” for Applicant and supports his sobriety. He hopes to marry her and start a 
family. (Tr. 41. 45-52) 
 
 Applicant submitted a March 2016 drug and alcohol assessment that stated he 
is not chemically dependent and has a low probability of having a substance 
dependence disorder. (AE A) To further corroborate sobriety, Applicant submitted 14 
negative drug tests taken over a two-year period from 2015 to 2016. (AE B) He also 
provided a statement of intent for automatic revocation of his security clearance for 
any violation of Guideline H. (SOR answer) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
 A work supervisor (WS) testified on Applicant’s behalf. WS has held a security 
clearance for 35 years and has known Applicant for 12 years professionally as well as 
personally. He provided persuasive testimony regarding Applicant’s good character, 
work ethic, and trustworthiness. He recommended Applicant for a security clearance. 
(Tr. 22-34) 
 
Applicant submitted 12 reference letters from a range of individuals to include 
former employers, supervisors, co-workers, and long-time friends. The collective 
sense of these letters conveys that Applicant is an individual who is mature, reliable, 
trustworthy, and has great integrity. All reference letters strongly endorse Applicant for 
a security clearance. (AE A; Tr. 52-57)  
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
4 
 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
5 
 
 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H through the evidence 
presented. Applicant fully disclosed the circumstances surrounding his drug use in his 
SOR response, in his OPM PSI, and during his hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 AG ¶ 
25(c) and “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows, “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
                                                          
1 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on 
the absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in May 2014, approximately 
25 months before his hearing. His negative drug tests over the two-year period before 
his hearing support his assertions of abstinence. The absence of more recent or 
extensive drug use and his promise not to use illegal drugs in the future eliminates 
doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to 
abstaining from illegal drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways that an Applicant can demonstrate intent not to 
abuse illegal drugs in the future. Applicant has met all four. He has disassociated from 
drug-using associates, he avoids the environment where drugs were used, he has 
abstained from drug use for about 25 months and has had no difficulty in doing so, 
and he has signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
drug violation.   
 
Applicant’s outstanding work performance shows his work behavior has not 
been indicative of his having a drug problem. He is viewed as a valuable employee, 
who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the defense industry is 
supported by company officials, who know him personally and professionally, by his 
witness, and by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged that drug abuse is incompatible with his future career. He 
expressed a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with total 
abstinence of marijuana or any other illegal drugs. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
3In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
7 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline H is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
additional comments are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employment history to date is indicative of stability and a 
strong work ethic. The support of his girlfriend, supervisor, and co-workers as well as 
his self-introspection should ensure his continued success. Applicant demonstrated 
the correct attitude and commitment to remaining drug-free. Considering his 
demeanor, testimony, and evidence presented, I believe Applicant has learned from 
his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. I find Applicant has 
presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
  
In sum, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration 
of the whole-person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
4See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
