 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01616   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. He has presented sufficient evidence 
to mitigate concerns raised by his history of illegal drug use, his 2009 arrest and 
subsequent conviction on drug charges, and his falsification of a 1989 security 
clearance application. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the drug involvement, criminal 
involvement, and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative 
judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On June 23, 2016, 
I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2 The parties 
submitted documents by the July 6, 2016 deadline. At the hearing, which proceeded as 
scheduled on July 11, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through M, and Hearing Exhibits I – III, without objection. 
The record remained open until August 31, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) received the transcript 
(Tr.) on July 25, 2016. Applicant timely submitted AE N through Q, which are also 
admitted, without objection.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since September 2012. He 
completed his most recent security clearance application in October 2012, disclosing 
use of methamphetamines between 2008 and 2010; illegal drug use after being granted 
a security clearance in 2000; a 2009 arrest and conviction on drug charges; and his 
subsequent treatment for substance abuse. During the investigation, Applicant revealed 
earlier drug use in high school and college that he intentionally failed to disclose on his 
1989 security clearance application.4  
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1983 and earned an associate’s degree 
in electronics technology in 1989. In high school and college, Applicant used drugs 
recreationally. He experimented with cocaine twice in the early 1980s. He smoked 
marijuana frequently between 1980 and 1989. Between 1987 and 1989, he used 
methamphetamines.  Applicant stopped all drug use when he became a DOD civilian 
employee in 1989. Applicant used his transition to full-time employment to change his 
social environment and distance himself from people who used drugs.  He focused on 
his career and his marriage. When his marriage ended in divorce in 1996, Applicant 
continued to abstain from drugs, citing the network of friends he had developed during 
his tenure as a federal employee. He married again in July 2004.5 
 
 In 2005, a medical condition forced Applicant into early retirement when he was 
40 years old. Without his work, he began to feel depressed. His second marriage ended 
in divorce in December 2008. Unemployed, depressed, and lonely, Applicant began to 
use methamphetamines. His use soon morphed into an addiction. In March 2009, 
Applicant was pulled over for a minor traffic violation. Based on Applicant’s behavior, 
the officer suspected that Applicant was under the influence of methamphetamines. 
Applicant consented to a car search and the officer found the drug and drug 
                                                          
2 This amended order changed the filing date of the pre-haring submissions from July 16, 2016 to July 6, 
2016.  
 
3 HE IV. 
 
4 Tr. 20; GE 1-2, 4.  
 
5 Tr. 21, 24-26, 41, 43-48; GE 1-2. 
  
 
3 
 
paraphernalia. At the time of the arrest, Applicant was working for a federal contractor 
as a consultant on as as-needed basis. Applicant testified that he was not working 
regularly on the contract when he was arrested. The record is unclear about whether 
Applicant’s security clearance, renewed in 2000, was active at the time of his arrest.6  
 
Applicant views his arrest as the moment that changed and saved his life. For the 
next year, Applicant tried to stop using drugs on his own. When he realized that he 
needed help, he disclosed his drug problem to his primary care physician. Applicant’s 
doctor encouraged him to disclose his problems to his family and referred him to a 
psychologist for drug treatment.7  
 
 Taking his doctor’s advice, Applicant first approached his father. Taken aback by 
his son’s confession of drug addiction, Applicant’s father made it clear that he was there 
to provide unconditional support. In October 2010, Applicant pleaded guilty to reduced 
charges of possession of drug paraphernalia and driving under the influence of a 
dangerous drug. He was sentenced to one day in jail and three years’ supervised 
probation. Applicant also lost his driving privileges and was ordered to complete a drug 
treatment program.  Applicant’s father, a retired Air Force senior master sergeant, drove 
Applicant to his doctor’s appointments and counseling sessions. Applicant found similar 
support when he disclosed his drug use to his older siblings. He eventually shared his 
addiction story with extended family members at a recent family reunion.8  
 
 At the time of his sentencing, Applicant had been receiving counseling from a 
psychologist for several months. The court accepted this counseling as fulfilling the 
terms of his sentence. During counseling, Applicant discovered his triggers and 
developed positive coping strategies. Applicant also learned that he was using 
methamphetamines to medicate undiagnosed adult attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), which is now managed by the appropriate medication. Applicant 
worked with his psychologist for a year and a half before she moved her practice to 
another state. She instructed Applicant that he could not maintain his sobriety through 
counseling alone and that he needed the support of a sobriety-management group. In 
2011, Applicant began attending Narcotics Anonymous (NA). Based on his progress in 
counseling, Applicant was released from probation after 18 months.9  
 
 Within a month of attending his first meeting, Applicant secured a sponsor and 
began working through the 12-step program. With the encouragement of his sponsor, 
Applicant has taken on a leadership role in the chapter and routinely leads the 
meetings. Applicant is also a sponsor. Applicant’s sponsor believes by sponsoring 
                                                          
6 Tr. 21, 26-28, 41-42, 48, 54-56, 59, 65-67; GE 5, AE L-M. 
 
7 Tr. 28-30, 33, 48-49, 59-60.   
 
8 Tr. 32-34, 60-61, 72-74, 77-80; GE 6.  
 
9 Tr. 30-32, 49-50, 83; AE L, P. 
 
 
4 
 
another person, Applicant is given another opportunity to work through the 12-step 
program, thereby increasing his commitment to sobriety. 10 
 
In addition to regular NA participation, Applicant maintains regular contact with 
his primary care physician, who manages his ADHD medication. Although not a 
specialist in addiction treatment, Applicant’s primary physician has had the opportunity 
to observe Applicant closely over the last eight years, and believes that Applicant has 
worked hard to return himself to good health. Applicant, who is confined to a wheelchair, 
also sees a pain specialist to manage chronic pain. Applicant disclosed his addiction 
history to his pain doctor, who monitors his opiate pain medication regularly, 
administering drug test at least once per quarter to ensure that Applicant does not 
relapse. Applicant has passed all of his drug tests.11  
 
In 2012, Applicant returned to employment as a federal contractor and was 
required to complete a security clearance application. He sought advice from his 
sponsor, a retired Marine master sergeant, who also dealt with drug use while having a 
clearance, about the falsification of his 1989 security clearance application. Applicant 
admitted that, at the time, he did not disclose use of illegal drugs because he was afraid 
of losing his job. Applicant’s sponsor encouraged him to tell the truth. Applicant 
disclosed his drug use on his October 2012 security clearance application and provided 
detail about his history of drug use during his December 2012 background interview. 
Applicant considers the disclosures a necessary action in his 12-step program. He 
believes the disclosures are form of making amends to the Government for his past 
misconduct.12  
  
 Those close to Applicant, his father, his sponsor, and a former co-worker, all of 
whom testified at the hearing, have all noticed significant changes in him. All have noted 
increased maturity, selflessness, and a deep-rooted commitment to sobriety. Several 
other co-workers, including his facility security officer (FSO), wrote letters on Applicant’s 
behalf. Each is aware of Applicant’s past struggles with illegal drugs and they respect 
him for the work he has done over the past few years to achieve and maintain sobriety. 
Applicant is considered honest, reliable, and trustworthy by his co-workers.13 
 
 Applicant has been sober for six years and has been participating in NA for five 
years. Applicant is proud of his sobriety and works diligently to protect it. Although 
Applicant has not attended individual counseling since 2011, he continues to display a 
high level of self-awareness. He is able to clearly articulate his triggers and apply the 
tactics to combat them, including expressing negative emotions, ongoing NA 
                                                          
10 Tr. 32, 34-37, 39, 51-53, 84-87, 92.  
 
11 Tr. 55, 69-71; AE N, P-Q.   
 
12 Tr. 89-92; GE 2.  
 
13 Tr. 74-75, 78, 80-82, 87, 96; AE C-K.  
 
 
5 
 
participation, regular communication with his sponsor, and being open about his 
struggles with addiction.14   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.15 
Applicant admits a history of disqualifying drug use in high school, college, and most 
                                                          
14 Tr. 45-46, 51, 56-57, 94.  
 
15 AG ¶ 24. 
 
 
6 
 
recently, regular use of methamphetamines between 2008 and 2010, after being 
granted a security clearance in 2000.16  
 
Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the drug involvement 
concerns. Applicant sought and completed counseling that focused on his substance 
abuse. He has demonstrated intent not to use drug in the future17 and has established 
an appropriate period of abstinence. In addition, Applicant has made himself even more 
accountable by sharing his drug issues with his family and several co-workers, creating 
another level of sobriety support. With the help of his primary care physician, Applicant’s 
ADHD is monitored and medicated, reducing the likelihood that Applicant will return to 
illegal drugs to medicate the disorder. He submits to regular drug testing as part of his 
pain management regime. Most important, Applicant understands his triggers and has 
developed coping skills to deal with them when they arise.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Criminal activity calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
law, rules, and regulations, as well as a doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness.18 Applicant admits to using illegal drugs between 1980 and 1989, 
and again from 2008 and 2010, which is admission of criminal conduct even though his 
illegal drug use resulted in one criminal incident.19 In 2009, Applicant was arrested on 
several drug charges to include driving under the influence of a dangerous drug 
(methamphetamine) and possession of drug paraphernalia. He entered a guilty plea to 
lesser charges.20  
 
 However, the 2009 incident is mitigated by the passage of time and no longer 
casts doubts on the Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment because of 
the work Applicant has done to achieve and maintain sobriety.21 Applicant’s sobriety 
maintenance is also strong evidence of successful rehabilitation.22 He has not engaged 
in any criminal conduct since 2009. He successfully completed drug treatment and was 
released from probation a year and a half early. He has maintained a positive 
employment record and, through NA, engages in constructive community involvement 
that encourages his ongoing sobriety and law-abiding conduct.  
 
 
                                                          
16 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (d). 
 
17 AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
18 AG ¶ 30. 
 
19 AG ¶ 31(c). 
 
20 AG ¶ 31(a).  
 
21 AG ¶ 31(a). 
 
22 AG 31(d). 
 
 
7 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when his actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about his ability to protect classified information.23 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant falsified a 1989 security clearance application by deliberately failing to 
disclose his recreational use of illegal drug between 1980 and 1989. Applicant admits 
that he withheld the information because he was afraid of losing his job. The record 
contains sufficient information to mitigate this concern.24  
 
When completing his 2012 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed his 
most recent drug use and criminal activity. He disclosed the details of his prior drug use 
during his background interview. He understood the potential consequences of his 
actions, but also understood the importance and the need to provide full, frank, and 
candid disclosure to the Government on the issue. In doing so, Applicant showed 
greater maturity and an understanding of the security clearance process. Also, 
Applicant now views truthfulness and openness as a necessity in maintaining his 
sobriety. As a result, his almost 30-year-old omission is not reflective of his current 
security worthiness.25  
 
The SOR also alleges Applicant’s past illegal drug use as disqualifying under the 
personal conduct guideline as it also shows poor judgement and a disregard for the law. 
However, Applicant’s past drug use is mitigated for the reasons discussed in the drug 
involvement guideline, above. Furthermore, Applicant has disclosed the extent and 
consequences of his drug use to his sobriety support group, his sponsor, his family, and 
a number of his co-workers to include his FSO. As a result, the misconduct does not 
serve as a potential source of vulnerability of exploitation for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. While those 
granted access to classified information are held to a high standard of conduct, they are 
not held to a standard of perfection. Nor is the purpose of a security clearance 
adjudication to punish applicants for past misconduct. All that is required is that an 
applicant’s past is not indicative of a current inability to properly handle and protect 
classified information. Here, it is not. Applicant has taken responsibility for his past 
issues with illegal drugs and his falsification of a 1989 security clearance application. He 
has shown remorse for his past conduct and has changed his behavior to reduce the 
likelihood of future recurrence of the issues raised in the SOR. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                          
23 See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
24 AG ¶ 16.  
 
25 AG ¶ 17(c).  
 
8 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
