 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03901 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2016, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on July 15, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 20, 2016, setting the hearing 
 
2 
 
 
for October 25, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
exhibit index and Department Counsel’s discovery letter were marked as hearing 
exhibits (HE I and II). Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) 1-1 to 1-22; 2-1 to 2-8; 
3-1 to 3-8, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s exhibit 
index was marked as HE III. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 1, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted SOR ¶ 1.d, but denied the 
remaining allegations. The admission is adopted as a finding of fact. After a careful 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor for over 19 
years. She is twice divorced and has one adult son who lives with her and shares living 
expenses. She is a high school graduate who has taken some college courses.2 
  
 The SOR alleges the following: a federal tax debt for $1,100, and a collection 
debt for $77; failure to file her 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns; failure to file 
her 2009-2012 state income tax returns; and a 2013 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The debts 
are supported by a credit report from April 2015, by bankruptcy court records, and by 
her statements to a defense investigator in July 2013.3 
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy was mainly caused by her ex-husband’s quitting his job, 
which decreased the family’s overall income by about $10,000 per year and required 
Applicant to pay all the monthly bills as well as fund her ex-husband’s schooling. When 
the bills and obligations became unmanageable, she sought bankruptcy protection in 
2013. The delay in filing her federal and state tax returns was due, in part, because her 
ex-husband refused to cooperate in providing necessary tax information. After her 
interview by a defense investigator in July 2013, Applicant took action to resolve her tax 
issues. As noted below, Applicant has filed all necessary returns and paid all tax liability. 
She filed her returns and paid the taxes due well before the SOR was issued in this 
case. Her current finances are in good shape and she has steadily increased her credit 
score.4 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Answer. 
 
2 Tr. at 5, 11, 19-20; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 3-6. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-23, 28-29, 30, 32-33; AE 1-1 to 1-22, 2-4 to 2-8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b (unfiled federal tax returns for 2011-2012 and unfiled state tax 
returns for 2009-2012): 
 
 Applicant documented that she filed her federal tax returns for 2011 and for 
2012. Although not alleged, she also documented that she filed her federal tax returns 
for 2013 to 2015. She documented that she filed her 2011 and 2012 state tax returns, 
but did not include documentation to show that she filed her 2009 and 2010 state tax 
returns. She also presented evidence that she filed her 2013 to 2015 state tax returns. 
She testified that she filed her 2009 and 2010 state tax returns. I find her testimony 
credible. Her tax filing issue is resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (federal tax debt for $1,100): 
 
 Applicant documented that she paid this tax debt in October 2012 when an 
overpayment was applied to her 2010 tax debt resulting in a zero balance owed for that 
year. This debt is resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (collection account for $77): 
 
 Applicant testified that this debt was included in her Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but a 
review of the schedules did not reveal the debt. This debt is of such a minor amount to 
have little, if any, security significance. This debt is not resolved, but inconsequential.7 
 
 Applicant provided job performance appraisals for 2013 and 2015. In 2013, she 
received an overall appraisal of “substantially achieved commitments” (3.2 out of 5). In 
2015, she received an overall appraisal of “exceeded commitments” (3.7 out of 5). She 
received a special recognition award from her employer in 2007 for exceptional 
performance. President Obama recognized her for her volunteer efforts in 2008, 2012, 
2013, 2014, and 2015. She was also trained as a court appointed special advocate in 
2013, which allowed her to represent the best interests of abused and neglected 
children in state court.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 22-23, 28-30; AE 1-1 to 1-22. 
 
6 Tr. at 24; AE 1-4. 
 
7 Tr. at 22; GE 4-5. 
 
8 AE .3-1 to 3-8 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant failed to file several years’ worth of federal and state tax returns and 
she owed federal tax and other debt. She had debts discharged in a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. I find the disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s took significant action after her background interview and 
subsequently filed all her federal and state tax returns and paid all existing tax debt. Her 
ex-husband quitting his job and incurring additional expenses necessitated her 2013 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Since she is up to date with all her federal and state tax return 
filings, her tax debt is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. Her ex-husband’s 
voluntary unemployment was a condition beyond her control. She showed responsible 
action by pursuing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy to achieve a fresh financial start. She 
receives credit for her efforts under AG ¶ 20(b). There is evidence of financial 
counseling from her bankruptcy case. She documented that her debts are under control 
by showing proof of payment of her tax debt and her increased credit rating. Her current 
finances are in good order. She receives credit under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances that 
led to Applicant’s financial problems and her personal situation. I also considered her 
job performance evaluations, her special recognition award, her child advocacy training, 
and her many years of volunteer service for which she received national recognition. 
The evidence supports Applicant’s track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
