 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03920 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 20, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR. In a February 4, 2016 e-
mail, he requested a decision on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on April 27, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on May 3, 
2016. He responded to the FORM on May 18, 2016. (Item 9) Department Counsel did 
not object to Applicant’s response to the FORM. (Item 10) On May 24, 2016, the FORM 
was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on December 9, 2016. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 1)    
 
 Applicant is being sponsored by a DOD contractor seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. If he obtains a security clearance, he will be hired. Since March 2010, 
Applicant has worked full-time with another company that does not require a security 
clearance. He has a high school diploma. He has had one period of unemployment 
between February 2009 and March 2010. He is single and has a seven-year-old 
daughter who does not live with him. (Item 3; Item 4)   
 
On September 4, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). A subsequent background investigation revealed the 
following financial issues which are alleged in the SOR: a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed 
on January 31, 2012, and dismissed on April 9, 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5 at 1; Item 6 at 
3; Item 7); a past due mortgage account in the amount of $24,864 that was in 
foreclosure (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 1-2); and a $293 utility account placed for collection in 
August 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 1; Item 6 at 5)  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include 24 delinquent medical accounts that were 
placed for collection, a total balance of $2,230 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.k, 1.n-1.cc: Item 6 at 5 - 
10); a $178 delinquent utility account placed for collection in August 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.l: 
Item 5 at 1; Item 6 at 6); and an $84 cable television account that was placed for 
collection in July 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.m: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 7)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that the medical debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.k, and 1.n -1.cc were covered by a workmen’s compensation claim.  He 
provided sufficient documentation to verify this assertion in his response to the SOR 
and response to the FORM. (Item 1; Item 9) The medical debts are not listed on his 
most recent credit report, dated November 24, 2015. (Item 5).  
 
 He indicates in his response to the SOR, that he intends to contact the creditors 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.l, and 1.m to plan payments. He provided proof that he paid 
$20 towards the $84 cable television debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. (Item 1) In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant addressed the medical debts that were covered by 
Workmen’s Compensation, but did not address the status of his mortgage foreclosure 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a; the two utility collection accounts alleged in  SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.l, 
and the cable television collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. (Item 9)  The status of 
the mortgage foreclosure alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.l, and 1.m are unresolved.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since about 2012.  The SOR alleges a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy which was dismissed, a mortgage foreclosure with a total loan amount of 
$36,871, three delinquent consumer accounts placed for collection, a total balance of 
$555, and 24 medical accounts placed for collection with a total balance of 
approximately $2,230. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
 
5 
 
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant has encountered financial problems since 
at least 2012, when he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The bankruptcy was eventually 
dismissed. While Applicant does not have a lot of unresolved debt, the main issue 
involves his mortgage foreclosure. Applicant provided no information on the status of his 
mortgage foreclosure nor provided an explanation of the steps he is taking to resolve 
the three minor consumer debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.l. and 1.m. For this reason, I 
cannot conclude Applicant’s financial issues are unlikely to recur and doubts remain 
about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies in the Applicant was unemployed between February 
2009 and March 2010. However, most of the financial problems arose after Applicant’s 
period of unemployment. For this reason, AG & 20(b) is given less weight. Applicant has 
been employed full-time since March 2010. He has not provided an explanation as to 
why he could not pay the bills that are unresolved.   
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant provided no proof that he attended  
financial counseling. The status of his unresolved delinquent accounts remain 
unresolved. His financial situation remains uncertain.  
 
AG & 20(d) applies with respect to the medical accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 
1.k, and 1.n – 1.cc. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to prove that these medical 
accounts were paid under a workmen’s compensation claim.  AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply 
with respect to the mortgage foreclosure alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and the three consumer 
 
6 
 
 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.l, and 1.m.  Applicant made a partial payment towards 
the cable television account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, but provided no proof of his efforts to 
resolve the account in his response to FORM. Having provided no information or an 
explanation on the status of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.l and 1.m, I cannot  
conclude Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve these accounts.  
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply because Applicant did not dispute his unresolved 
debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts that would mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. While he provided sufficient evidence that the medical 
debts were paid by Workmen’s Compensation, he provided no information on the status 
of his remaining unresolved debts. The most serious of Applicant’s unresolved debt is 
the mortgage foreclosure alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The three minor unresolved debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.l, and 1.m total only $555. Applicant should have been able to 
resolve these debts. His failure to do so indicates a negligent attitude towards paying 
his debts. He did not provide sufficient information as to the status of his remaining 
unresolved debts. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant takes 
 
7 
 
 
proactive steps towards resolving his delinquent accounts and establishes a track 
record of repayment, he may demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In the future, Applicant may be able 
to demonstrate a track record of resolving his financial obligations. It is too soon to 
make that conclusion at this point. The security concerns raised under financial 
considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.m:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.cc:    For Applicant  
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
