 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04198 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 11, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 19, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 24, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through D. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
After the hearing he provided AE H, which was admitted without objection.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He has never 
been married and has no children. He has held a security clearance since 1996. He has 
worked steadily since 1996, and for his present employer, a federal contractor, since 
2001.2  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in July 2014. In it he 
disclosed that in the past seven years he had illegally used marijuana about five times 
from approximately June 2012 to March 2014. He disclosed that he held a security 
clearance at that time. He further disclosed that he did not intend to use marijuana 
again because it is a violation of federal law and he did not “want to continue taking it.”3  
 
During Applicant’s interview with a government investigator in January 2015, he 
again disclosed his prior marijuana use and confirmed his last use was in March 2014. 
He explained he smoked it a few times in social settings with people in a running group. 
He never purchased, cultivated, or manufactured it. He told the investigator he did not 
intend to use marijuana in the future.4  
 
Applicant testified that he tried marijuana for the first time in July 2012 out of 
curiosity. He used it four more times to see if its effect was different. He did not 
intentionally look for an opportunity to use marijuana. Rather, it was passed around at a 
party and available. He does not know who provided it. He admitted he was drinking 
alcohol at the time, but does not believe he was intoxicated. He has never used any 
other illegal drug.5  
 
Applicant testified consistently with his prior admissions. He explained he has 
contact with only one person from his running group who uses marijuana, but does not 
do so in his presence. He has not used marijuana since his last use in March 2014. He 
has not been in any setting where illegal drugs were present since March 2014. He 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the Government’s Exhibit list. HE II is its discovery letter. 
 
2 Tr. 9-10, 18. 
 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 29; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 22-24, 27-32, 36-37. 
 
3 
 
 
disclosed that his employer has a drug policy against illegal use of drugs. He was aware 
of the drug policy when he used marijuana. He admitted he used poor judgment. He is 
remorseful, understands the seriousness of his conduct, and deeply regrets his actions. 
He admitted he made a serious mistake.6 
 
Applicant provided a written statement that he agrees to an automatic revocation 
of a security clearance for any violation of the drug involvement guideline, to include any 
drug abuse or any illegal drug use.7 
 
Applicant provided a character letter from a coworker and friend whom he has 
worked with for more than 20 years and who also holds a security clearance. His friend 
is aware of Applicant’s past marijuana use. He described Applicant as honest, forthright, 
and a person who observes the rules and regulations on handling classified material.8 
Another coworker, who has known Applicant for 15 years, described him as trustworthy, 
reliable, punctual, faithful, and committed to fairness. Applicant’s integrity and loyalty 
has never been questioned. It was noted that Applicant has made significant 
contributions to the development of new technology for the United States that has 
contributed to strengthen the military and the defense of the nation.9 Applicant provided 
a copy of a criminal history document from the county where he lives that shows his 
record is clear.10 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 23, 26, 33-35. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
9 AE C. 
 
10 Tr. 21; AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the trustworthiness concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse;  
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
5 
 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana five times from June 2012 to March 2014, while holding 
a security clearance. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant voluntarily disclosed his illegal marijuana use on his SCA and to the 
government investigator. He admitted he used it five times from June 2012 to March 
2014 out curiosity. He does not intend to use it in the future. He signed a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any future violation. He understands 
the seriousness of his conduct while holding a security clearance and that it is a 
violation of his employer’s drug policy. He no longer associates with those he previously 
used marijuana with, except for one person, who does not use it in Applicant’s 
presence. Applicant is remorseful for his conduct. It has been almost three years since 
his last use of marijuana. I find a sufficient period of time has lapsed, the conduct was 
infrequent, it is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his current reliability or 
trustworthiness. Applicant has demonstrated his intention not to abuse any drugs in the 
future. I find AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 51 years old. He self-reported his marijuana use on his SCA and to 
a government investigator. I found his testimony credible and forthright. His use of 
marijuana is aggravated because it occurred while holding a security clearance and in 
violation of his employer’s drug policy. He credibly testified he tried marijuana due to 
curiosity and does not intend to use it in the future. It has been almost three years since 
his last use. He is remorseful and regrets his conduct. I have given considerable weight 
to the fact he self-reported his misconduct. Although his past marijuana use is serious, I 
am confident that he will not abuse illegal drugs in the future. I find Applicant has met 
his burden of persuasion. I do not have questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
