                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-04140
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 3, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On January 5, 2016, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.) 
On February 22, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. On
February 23, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was
provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered four documentary
exhibits. (Items 1-4.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on April 7,  2016.
Applicant submitted an additional document, which has been identified and entered into
evidence without objection as Item A. The case was assigned to this Administrative
1
Judge on September 13, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 47 years old. He is unmarried, and he has no children. He received a
high school degree. He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Item 2.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically a delinquent debt, and failing to file Federal tax returns, under Adjudicative
Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were
listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to the Federal Government for a tax lien entered against
Applicant in 2008, is cited in the SOR in the amount of $15,524. The credit report, dated
October 1, 2014, and submitted with the FORM, establishes this debt is owed by
Applicant, and it does not show that this debt has been reduced or resolved. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in his RSOR, and he wrote, 
as of the date of this Statement of Reasons, the lien remains unpaid
because I was advised to complete filing the rest of my unfiled taxes to
make arrangements for all of them combined. Now that all of my tax
returns have been filed, I am working with a tax reconciliation firm, on
completing the IRS Form 433-F form.  Upon completion of this form, we
will be working with the IRS ACS United States citizen to finalize a Fresh
Start Installment agreement. (Item 1.)
As stated above, Applicant submitted an additional document, a letter from him,
dated April 5, 2016, that he wrote after the issuance of the FORM. (Item A.) Applicant
gave no indication that he has made any payments toward the tax lien.
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for
tax years 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. Applicant admitted this SOR
allegation in his RSOR, and he wrote,
This issue has been resolved as all past due tax returns were filed in
September of 2014. Additionally, I filed an extension for my 2013 Federal
Income Tax Returns and it was electronically filed and accepted on
09/17/2014, before the 10/15/2014 deadline. I am currently making
2
voluntary payments until Fresh Start Arrangements can be completed.
(Item 1.)
In his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), Applicant
wrote that he failed to file his tax returns from 2008 to 2013 because he thought he
would be entitled to a refund. (Item 2.) Applicant did not submit any documentation
establishing that the returns had been filed.
In Applicant’s Post-FORM letter, he explained that he had periods of time when
he was unemployed or periods when he was earning less than he had previously
earned. He also wrote, “. . .  in my past, there have been times when I was careless and
didn’t have a good grasp of credit, debt and taxes because I am far from perfect, but
since getting back to working I’ve been trying to do everything I could to clean
everything up.” (Item A.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
3
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual
Federal, state or local income tax returns as required . . .” is also applicable to Applicant
in this case. The evidence has established that Applicant failed to timely file his Federal
tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2013 as required by law, and has not resolved his
overdue tax debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. While Applicant has written that he has now filed all of his overdue tax
returns, no independent evidence was introduced to establish that his Federal tax
returns have all been filed. Also, as has been reviewed by the Appeal Board, the simple
act of filing returns many years after they were due is not automatically dispositive.
Applicant’s failure to file his tax returns in a timely manner for several years shows a
pattern of behavior that involves failure to follow legal requirements. I also considered
that Applicant’s tax debt continues to be unresolved. Therefore, I cannot find that AG ¶
4
20(a) “the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment,” applies to this case. 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As reviewed above,
Applicant’s failure to timely file his tax returns occurred, at least in part, because of
unemployment or underemployment. However, again, no independent evidence was
introduced to establish that his Federal tax returns have all been filed, or that the tax
debt has been resolved or reduced. Therefore, I find that this mitigating condition is not
a factor for consideration in this case.
As Applicant failed to timely file his Federal tax returns for tax years 2008 through
2013, has not established through independent evidence that he has filed these tax
returns, and has not established that his tax debt has been resolved or reduced, I find
Guideline F against Applicant. If Applicant wishes to obtain a security clearance in the
future, he must fully establish that he has filed and continues to file all of his required
Federal tax returns in a timely manner, and is making a significant effort to resolve his
delinquent tax debt. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions are applicable and controlling, I find that
the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all
5
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the
whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
6
