 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03294 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to retain a security clearance required for employment 
with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on October 24, 26, and 31, 2012. 
(Item 3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
November 12, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 9, 2016. He admitted 16 and denied 3 
of the 19 allegations of delinquent debts. He elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on March 22, 2016. (Item 6) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on March 23, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
timely filed a response to the FORM on April 9, 2016. (Item 7) Department Counsel had 
no objection to consideration of the additional material. (Item 8) I was assigned the case 
on December 2, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interviews (PSI) with an OPM agent in October 2012 (Item 3) was not authenticated and 
could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make 
any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, 
and he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a 
Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the summary. In his response to the FORM, Applicant did not object to 
consideration of the PSI. Any objection to the information is waived. I will consider 
information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 58 years old. He graduated from high school in 1977. He served on active 
duty in the Navy from June 1977 until June 1986 when he was honorably discharged. 
He was eligible for access to classified information while serving on active duty. He was 
first married in May 1989 and divorced in December 2009. He has a daughter from that 
marriage. He pays both monthly child and spousal support to his former wife and his 
daughter totaling $550. He married again in March 2014, and has a stepson from this 
marriage.  
 
 Applicant has been employed as a test engineer with the same defense 
contractor since May 1997. There is no information in the case file to indicate his 
present salary. However, in the PSI, he listed his gross monthly salary as $2,838, with 
net salary of $1,701. He listed his wife’s gross monthly salary as $2,566, with net salary 
as $1,950. He listed expenses that exceeded their combined income. Applicant noted in 
the PSI that he lives paycheck to paycheck but at times has approximately $100 to $200 
remaining in a month. He has difficulty paying all of his debts and has to decide in some 
months not to pay some bills. (Item 3, PSI, at 14) 
 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated October 2, 2012; and Item 5, 
dated October 26, 2012, and March 22, 2016) confirm the following delinquent debts for 
Applicant; two telecommunications debts in collection for $466 (SOR 1.a), and $82 
(SOR 1.b); a gas utility debt in collection for $74 (SOR 1.c); a television service debt in 
collection for $288 (SOR 1.d); a charged-off automobile loan for $12,014 (SOR 1.e); two 
different credit card debts in collection by the same collection agency for $21,570 (SOR 
1.f), and $8,178 (SOR 1.g); a credit card debt charged-off for $6,886 (SOR 1.h); a 
television service account in collection for $261 (SOR 1.i); a credit card debt charged-off 
for $18,012 (SOR 1.j); a credit card account charged-off for $9,669 (SOR 1.k); a credit 
card debt charged-off for $10,466 (SOR 1.l); a credit card debt charged-off for $5,866 
(SOR 1.m) a credit card debt in collection for $14,902 (SOR 1.n); an account charged-
off for $5,000 (SOR 1.o); a department store account charged-off for $1,742 (SOR 1.p); 
an account charged-off for $905 (SOR 1.q); a mail order account charged-off  for $506 
(SOR 1.r); and a service account in collection for $292 (SOR 1.s). 
 
The debts, except SOR 1.n, were acknowledged and confirmed by Applicant in 
the PSI. (Item 3) In his response to the SOR (Item 1), Applicant admitted all of the debts 
except the debts at SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 1.n. He claims that the debts at SOR 1.e and 1.n 
are duplicate car loan debts; and the debt at 1.f is the same as the debt at SOR 1.j. He 
provided no information to verify his claims that the debts are duplicate debts. The total 
delinquent debt in the SOR is approximately $117,000.  
 
Applicant in the PSI attributes his poor financial situation, lack of funds, and 
delinquent debts to the loss of income, expenses, and support payments from his first 
marriage. He admitted to some bad financial management practices. He offered no 
details on how his divorce and support payments contributed to his financial problems. 
A significant amount of his delinquent debts is credit card debt. Applicant admitted in the 
PSI that he used credit cards for food, rent, and other normal expenses when he did not 
have sufficient funds to pay for the items.  
 
Applicant, in his answer to the SOR and his response to the FORM, claims that 
some of the debts (SOR 1.e, 1.h, and 1.n) were resolved by garnishment. He presented 
no documents to indicate his wages were garnished and the debts were resolved. He 
stated in the PSI that he intended to contact an attorney to file bankruptcy. In his recent 
response to the FORM, Applicant notes that he intends to resolve some of his debts 
through bankruptcy. Applicant did not present any documents to verify that he filed a 
bankruptcy petition or even contacted an attorney to file the petition. Applicant did not 
present any documents to signify that he has or is receiving financial counseling.  
 
Applicant included a letter of compelling need from his manager and the 
company’s facility security officer. The letter noted the company’s vital need for 
Applicant to have access to classified information. They stated that Applicant is an 
important member of one of their teams that provides a critical component of a 
significant defense contract. The loss of Applicant’s access to classified information 
would negatively impact the team’s ability to support the vital defense contract. If a 
 
4 
 
 
replacement was required, it would take months to train the replacement and for the 
person to become fully effective. (Response to FORM, Letter, dated March 17, 2016 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations. Unless there is extreme 
circumstances, failure to pay voluntarily incurred delinquent debts raises questions 
about a person’s judgment and trustworthiness. One who does not pay his financial 
obligations in a timely and responsible fashion, may also show lack of responsibility in 
the proper handling of classified information.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in his credit reports, by his admissions to the OPM investigator, and his 
response to the allegations in the SOR. All of Applicant’s SOR debts are listed on the 
credit reports at Items 4 and 5. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt. Once the Government has established delinquent debt, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate those debts. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence 
unlikely. Applicant has financially stable employment having been employed by the 
same defense contractor for approximately 20 years with no periods of unemployment.  
 
 The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant’s debts were 
incurred in the normal course of living and not because of any unusual circumstances or 
by circumstances beyond his control. Applicant claims the debts were incurred after his 
divorce and because of financial hardships. He did not present any information to link 
the circumstances of his divorce to the need to use credit cards for normal expenses 
and his failure to pay his credit card and other debts. Applicant has not shown that he 
acted reasonably and responsibly to resolve his financial problems. He noted that some 
debts were paid by garnishment, but he has not provided adequate information to show 
the garnishments were paid and resolved.  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶20(c) does not apply. Applicant did not present any 
evidence concerning receiving financial counseling. 
 
 Applicant has not established a good-faith effort to pay his financial obligations. 
For a good-faith effort, there must be an ability to pay financial obligations, the desire to 
pay them, and evidence of a of a good-faith effort to pay or resolve the obligations. 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling financial obligations 
is needed. Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of payment of financial 
obligations. A meaningful track record of payment can be established by evidence of 
actual payments or reduction of obligation through payment of debts. A promise to pay 
financial obligations is not a substitute for a track record of meeting obligations in a 
timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish 
that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems and has taken significant 
action to implement that plan. While he claims to have resolved some debts by 
garnishment, he did not present evidence to verify and establish the payments. He did 
not present a plan as to how he intended to pay or resolve his debts. He does not have 
a track record of paying his debts. Applicant also claims that some of the debts are 
more than seven years old and uncollectible. Relying on debt to become uncollectible 
by the passage of time is not a good-faith effort.  
 
 Applicant stated his intent as early as 2012 to file a bankruptcy to resolve his 
debts. Applicant recently stated his intent again to file a bankruptcy in his response to 
the FORM. Bankruptcy is a legitimate and legal means of resolving debt. However, 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has not presented any information to establish any actions taken to resolve 
the debts through bankruptcy. Mitigating condition ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not present any information on any disputes he entered concerning 
any of the debts. AG ¶20 (e) does not apply 
 
 The evidence does not support responsible management by Applicant of his 
finances. His financial problems are not under control. He has not established that he 
contacted the creditors to resolve the debts. Based on Applicant’s failure to verify the 
debts and make payment arrangements, it is clear that he has not been reasonable and 
responsible in regard to his finances. His lack of reasonable and responsible action 
towards his finances is a strong indication that he may not protect and safeguard 
classified information. Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active duty 
service in the Navy, and his 20 years of service for the defense contractor. I considered 
his company’s statement of compelling need for Applicant to work on a vital defense 
contract.  
 
 Even though Applicant has been gainfully employed by a defense contractor 
since 1997, he did not provide sufficient credible documentary information to establish 
that he incurred delinquent debt under unusual circumstance or by circumstances 
beyond his control. He did not establish that he has taken reasonable and responsible 
action to resolve his financial problems. He did not present a plan as to how he intended 
 
8 
 
 
to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management 
of his finances and a consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
