                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15–03111
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 3, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing,
(e-QIP) on September 8, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  On January 17, 2016, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The SOR set forth the reasons why DoD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on February 13, 2016, and he elected
to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on
or about March 16, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on March 23, 2016.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
of receipt.  Applicant submitted a reply to the FORM.  Department Counsel had no
objection and it was admitted into evidence.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on December 1, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 55 years old and married a third time with five adult children.  He
has a high school diploma.  He holds the position of Senior Test Engineer for a defense
contractor.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this
employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline. 
Credit Reports of the Applicant dated September 13, 2014; and March 19, 2015, reflect
that Applicant was at one time indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR, in
an amount totaling in excess of $35,000.  (See Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)        
Applicant served in the United States Navy from 1980 to 1985, when he was
honorably discharged.  He has been married twice before, and was married a third time
in 2008.  He has worked for his current employer since 2004.  In 2012, Applicant’s wife
lost her job, and their household income was reduced by $50,000 per year.  Applicant’s
wife could not find employment until the spring of 2014, when she found part-time
employment.  It was not until February 2015 when she secured a full time job. 
Applicant’s wife’s unemployment caused financial difficulties for the Applicant since the
family relied on both incomes to sustain their needs.  While his wife was unemployed,
Applicant continued to pay the mortgage, insurance, car payments, electricity, etc, but
payments to creditors fell behind.  Applicant’s real problems began when his wife’s
unemployment benefits ran out, which cut them down to one income.  Applicant then
used credit cards to purchase the every day items needed to sustain his household.  As
a result, Applicant became financially overextended.
      
The following four debts listed in the SOR became delinquent.  Each of the debts
are credit cards that Applicant used to purchase necessities for the family, such as
groceries, gas, clothing, and household supplies.  Applicant accepts responsibility for
his debt and he plans to pay it off.  He has no plans of filing bankruptcy.       
      
1.a.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the amount of approximately
$12,661.  In July 2014, Applicant started making regular monthly payments of $10
toward the debt.  Since filing his answer to the SOR, Applicant has paid a total of  $113
2
toward the debt.  The balance has been minimally reduced to $12,566.48.  Applicant
states that he has been unable to increase the payment at this time due to a spousal
support payment of $400 he makes to his ex-wife, which will end in June 2016.  At that
point, Applicant will increase his monthly payment to $200, until the debt is paid in full.
1.b. A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the amount of approximately
$11,137.  In July 2014, Applicant started regular monthly payments of $10 toward the
debt.  Since filing his answer to the SOR, Applicant has paid a total of $113 toward the
debt.  Applicant states that he has been unable to increase the payment at this time due
to a spousal support payment of $400 he makes to his ex-wife, which will end in June
2016.  At that point, Applicant will increase his monthly payment to $200, until the debt
is paid in full.  
1.c.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the amount of approximately
$6,229.  Applicant entered into a verbal agreement with the creditor in April 2015 to pay
$100 before the 30  of each month toward the current balance of $5409.08.  Applicantth
has complied with the arranged payment plan, and will continue to do so until the debt 
is paid in full. 
1.d.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the amount of approximately
$5,779.  From April 2016 going forward, Applicant has made regular monthly payments
$165 on the current balance of $4,737.52.  He plans to continue to do so until the debt is
paid in full.         
Applicant states that he plans to increase his monthly payments to his creditors,
as other debts get paid off or as funds become available.  (Applicant’s Reply to the
FORM).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors and
Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
  
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
3
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question, posed
4
in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions based
on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized by
President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in excessive financial indebtedness that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the
finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has had excessive financial indebtedness (Guideline F) and the totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant. 
Because of the scope and nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence,
Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is
sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline F of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that when Applicant’s wife lost her job in 2012, their
comfortable two-income household went to one income, which caused financial
difficulties.  Even then, Applicant continued to pay his mortgage, insurance, car
5
payments and utilities without interruption.  Only his credit card bills fell behind.  But, they
have been heavily charged up.  Applicant owes a total of approximately $34,000 in
delinquent credit card debt.  In February 2015, his wife became employed full time. 
Since then, the Applicant has set up payment plans with each of his creditors to resolve
his delinquent debts.  It is noted, however, that the monthly payments he has been
making are very small, and it will take a significant amount of time to resolve them, if he
does not make them a priority.  At this time, Applicant has not made much progress in
resolving his debts, but he has not completely neglected them, and he has demonstrated
some level of responsibility.  It can be assumed that going forward, the Applicant will
increase his monthly payments to each of his creditors, as more discretionary income
becomes available, and he will not incur any new debt, until these old debts has been
completely resolved.  In the event that Applicant fails to resolve his debts in a timely
fashion, or if he incurs additional debt without resolving the old debt, his security
clearance will be in immediately jeopardy.  He understands that he must continue to live
within his means at all times, if he is to be eligible for a security clearance.  He also
understands that he must be responsible in handling his finances.  
Applicant has submitted documentary evidence to support the fact that he has
been making payments to the creditors listed in the SOR.  This compelling documentary
evidence shows that he has acted reasonably and responsibly.  He has shown good-
faith by starting to repay his financial obligations.  Based upon this documentation, there
is sufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation.  Considering all of the evidence,
Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is
sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
   
In regard to Guideline F, Financial Considerations, Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts, are also applicable.  Accordingly, I find for Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  He has made a good-faith effort to resolve
his debts, and he must completely resolve them as swiftly as he is capable.  Under the
particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines
viewed as a whole supports a whole-person assessment of good judgment,
trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified
information.  
6
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the applicant is and has been
sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect the 
Government’s national interest. Overall, based upon the seriousness of the conduct
outlined here, this Applicant has now demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy, and 
does meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I
find for Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
     On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has overcome the Government's case
opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
7
