 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05340 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Randall E. Wilbert, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his drug involvement. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 2, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 2, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on June 14, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.  Applicant, 
through legal counsel, responded to the FORM on August 4, 2016. The case was 
assigned to me on January 25, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-4. FORM Item 4 is 
an unauthenticated summary of an April 20, 2015 interview with a government 
background investigator. In his response to the FORM, Applicant objected to the 
admission of FORM Item 4 into evidence. Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.20, FORM Item 4 
is not admitted into evidence because the summary of interview is unauthenticated. 
FORM Item 3 is admitted into evidence as Government Exhibit 3, without objection.1 
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM included a cover letter, a memorandum, a 
copy of his response to the SOR, and July 2016 drug test results. These four 
documents are admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D, without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1996 and a 
master’s degree in 1999. Since 1999, he has been employed by a DOD contractor. He 
was first married from 1983 to 1989. He was then married from 1996 to 2007. He has 
an 18-year-old daughter.2 
 
 Between July 1973 to at least December 2014, Applicant used marijuana on 
several occasions. In 1973, he was arrested for possession of marijuana; however, he 
was released without formal charges. He also purchased marijuana on multiple 
occasions between 1973 and May 2014. Between 2007 and 2014, he estimated that he 
used marijuana approximately 15 to 20 times.3   
 
 Applicant participated in two drug tests – in March 2016 and July 2016 – and 
tested negative for marijuana, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), and opiates.4 There is no 
evidence that he has been evaluated by a substance abuse counselor or has attended 
substance abuse treatment. 
  
 On his March 2015 security clearance application (SCA) and in his response to 
the SOR, Applicant stated his intent to cease further illegal drug use. His motivations for 
ceasing his illegal drug use are his continued employment, his security clearance 
                                                          
1 FORM Items 1 and 2 consist of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are admitted into the record. 
 
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 3. Although Applicant’s FORM response states that the marijuana use was 15-20 times per year, I 
have concluded that this was a typographical error given the totality of the record evidence. 
 
4 Response to SOR; AE C; AE D. 
 
3 
 
eligibility, and his desire to be a good example to his teenage daughter.5 He claimed to 
have no derogatory information in his personnel file; however, he has provided no 
corroborating documentation.6 Furthermore, there is no evidence his employer is aware 
of his illegal drug use. There is no evidence as to whether Applicant ceased all contacts 
with his drug-using associates or ceased attendance at social gatherings where he had 
used drugs in the past. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”7 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
5 GE 3; Response to SOR; AE B. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 
F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction;” and 
 
AG 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia.” 
 
 Between 1973 and December 2014, Applicant used marijuana on several 
occasions. More recently, he used marijuana approximately 15-20 times between 2007 
and 2014. Between 1973 and May 2014, he purchased marijuana on several occasions, 
and he was arrested for illegal drug possession in 1973. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply.  
 
The Government established a case for disqualification. Accordingly, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.8 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
                                                          
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
5 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the 
drug involvement was recent. There are no bright-line rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@9  
 
 In the present case, Applicant’s admitted drug involvement – 1973 to December 
2014 – overlapped with his employment as a DOD contractor since 1999. His illegal 
drug use and purchases violated federal and state law and DOD policies prohibiting 
illegal drug use by its contractors. Applicant’s attestations in his SCA and in his 
response to the SOR that he is a “law-abiding citizen” and wants to be a good example 
for his daughter are undercut by his decades of illegal drug use and his use during most 
of his daughter’s childhood. He has not demonstrated that he ceased attending social 
gatherings at which he had previously used illegal drugs. He has not presented 
evidence of changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 
26(a) does not apply.    
 
 Applicant has not stated that he has ceased contact with his drug-using 
associates or avoided the circumstances in which he used illegal drugs in the past. 
Although his counsel argues that he no longer associates with drug users, Applicant 
himself made no such statements. 
 
 Applicant’s last use of marijuana was December 2014. As of his August 2016 
response to the SOR, his period of abstinence from illegal drug use was approximately 
20 months. He alluded to other periods of drug abstinence, though he failed to provide 
more specific information about the length and recency of such periods and why he 
resumed his marijuana use. The facts of this case mirror those in ISCR Case No. 12-
06707: 
 
The gravamen of the Judge’s decision is the fact that the period of 
abstinence established by the evidence is not compelling in terms of 
mitigation when considered in the context of Applicant’s 30-year history of 
marijuana use, especially when that use took place despite Applicant’s 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
knowledge that it was illegal and contrary to the Government’s and his 
subsequent employers’ drug-free policies.10 
 
Given Applicant’s 40-year history of drug use compared to a 20-month period of 
abstinence, the evidence is insufficient to conclude that he has established an 
“appropriate period of abstinence.”  
 
 Applicant’s expressed intent to cease all illegal drug use – in his SCA and 
response to the SOR – is the functional equivalent of a signed, sworn statement with 
automatic revocation under AG ¶ 26(b)(4). AG ¶ 26(b) applies.11 Nevertheless, 
Applicant’s lengthy drug history, insufficient evidence of reform and rehabilitation, and 
the absence of evidence that he has disassociated himself from other drug users, cast 
doubt as to his judgment and reliability. I find that drug involvement concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline H and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is a mature, educated individual, who has been employed by a DOD 
contractor for over 17 years. He voluntarily disclosed his drug arrest, use, and 
purchases on his SCA, and he expressed an intent to cease further drug use.  
Notwithstanding his maturity, education, and employment history, Applicant’s marijuana 
use over a 40-year period showed an inability or unwillingness to comply with laws, 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 12-06707 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 17, 2014). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 12-06885 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 12, 2013) (“The mere presence or absence of any 
given Adjudicative Guideline disqualifying or mitigating condition is not solely dispositive of a case”). See 
also ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
7 
 
rules, and regulations. His assertions that he is a “law-abiding citizen” and seeks to be a 
good example to his teenage daughter are undercut by this decades of illegal drug use 
– including 15 years while employed as a DOD contractor – and his illegal drug use 
throughout his daughter’s childhood. Given his lengthy drug history and his failure to 
demonstrate that he has ceased contact with his drug-using associates, he has not 
established that such circumstances are unlikely to recur. As a result, the totality of the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the drug 
involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
