 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-05632  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant borrowed $14,000 from a relative to repay some delinquent debts, but 
remains unable or unwilling to repay that loan and other delinquencies exceeding 
$5,000. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 2, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On February 23, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 9, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
April 8, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on April 11, 2016, and received by him on April 15, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. He did not file any objection to the Government’s FORM. However, he 
submitted additional evidence and comments in response thereto, which were received 
by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on April 25, 2016. Department 
Counsel had no objection to the admissibility into evidence of this response to the 
FORM, which is marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
November 1, 2016. Items 1 through 5 and AE A are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 13 of the 14 allegations concerning 
his delinquent debts. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.m, and claimed that he had 
paid that debt before issuance of the SOR. His admissions to the 13 other allegations 
are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old and recently divorced. He incurred a substantial amount 
of deferred student loan debt to attend community college classes from 2009 to present, 
but has not completed a degree. He accepted a job offer from a Federal contractor in 
November 2014, for a position that required him to obtain a security clearance. Prior to 
being offered this position, he held several jobs with different private employers, and 
experienced periods of unemployment from August 2012 to May 2013 (after being fired 
from a job), and September 2009 to January 2010 (after being laid off due to lack of 
work from a job that he started in January 2007). (Item 2; Item 3.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from December 2014 and January 2016, 
the SOR alleged 14 delinquent debts, which totaled $19,887. The debts became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2014. (Items 1, 4, 5.) Applicant correctly asserted that the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.j concern the same credit card debt, reported at 
different times in different amounts by the collection agency. The credit report entries 
reflect the same underlying information about that account. (Item 2; Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 On February 29, 2016, Applicant deposited $14,000 that he borrowed from a 
relative to pay debts into his bank account. Between March 4 and March 14, 2016, 
payments from that account, totaling $13,158, were disbursed to repay or settle the 
seven debts, totaling $14,068, which were listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, 
and 1.n. Although those particular debts are now resolved, Applicant has no apparent 
means to fulfill his stated intention to repay the $14,000 loan to his relative. (Item 2; AE 
A.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has not made any repayments toward the five 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.l, which total $5,002. He 
said, without providing documentation, that the creditor holding the $173 collection 
account for cable services, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l, had closed the account and would not 
accept payment. He further said, without proof, that he had paid the $66 cable bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. However, that debt still shows as an outstanding collection 
account on page 9 of the Experian credit report he submitted in his response to the 
FORM. (Item 2; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, a workable budget, or 
other documentation to show that he has started living within his means and meeting his 
financial obligations. He offered no character references or evidence concerning the 
quality of his work performance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. From 2011 to 2014, he accumulated 
13 delinquent accounts totaling over $19,000. The fact that he borrowed $14,000 from a 
relative to repay some of those debts, without any apparent means to repay that loan, 
did not reduce his financial overextension. That action merely changed the identities of 
                                                 
1
 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
his creditors from commercial institutions to a family member toward whom Applicant is 
more personally obligated. His financial history and ongoing pattern of inability or 
unwillingness to pay his debts raise security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are numerous, ongoing, and arose from normal life 
circumstances. They continue to reflect unreliability and poor judgment. He provided 
insufficient evidence that his divorce or periods of unemployment arose from 
circumstances beyond his control, or that he attempted to responsibly manage his debts 
while they were accumulating. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not provide mitigation of the 
security concerns. There is no evidence that he participated in financial counseling or 
that his financial problems are under control. Thus, he failed to establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(c). He submitted evidence that he resolved seven of the SOR-listed 
debts, indicating a good-faith effort to repay them. However, he did so by using funds he 
borrowed from a relative and has no apparent means to repay. He further admitted his 
present inability or unwillingness to resolve the remaining alleged debts, which total 
more than $5,000. Little significant mitigation was established under AG ¶ 20(d) given 
these circumstances. Applicant disputed that he still owed the $66 debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.m, but provided no substantiating documentation. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
expressed in the SOR. The alleged delinquent debts arose between 2011 and 2014. He 
resolved 7 of the 13 debts, but only by incurring $14,000 in new debt to a relative, with 
no apparent means to repay it. He did not present evidence of credit or financial 
counseling, a budget, or a plan for addressing the remaining debts that might 
demonstrate rehabilitation or behavioral change. The likelihood that similar problems 
will continue remains a security issue, such that the potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress is undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:  Against Applicant2 
                                                 
2
 The specific debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.n are resolved, but Applicant 
admitted them and still owes the $14,000 he used to repay those debts to his relative. These 
circumstances do not support findings for Applicant concerning those debts, or Paragraph 1 in general. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
