                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-01958
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James B. Norman, Esquire, Chief Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 3, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. (Item
2.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG),
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing and signed it on November 20,
2015, and he requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a
hearing. (Item 2.) On January 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued an
amendment to the SOR detailing the security concerns under Guideline J for Applicant.
Applicant’s written answer to the amended SOR is included with the amended SOR.
(Item 4.) On February 16, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered 14 documentary exhibits. (Items
1-14.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on March 26, 2016. Applicant
1
submitted no additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge
on September 13, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel has requested that I take administrative notice of certain
facts relating to the Federal Government’s official policy with regard to state legalization
of marijuana. The attached documents relating to this request were admitted into
evidence as Items 8 through 14. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the
Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and the admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 38 years old and a high school graduate, who has attended college.
He has never been married, but he lives with a cohabitant, and he has no children.
Applicant has been employed as a Senior Information Security Engineer by his current
employer, a defense contractor, since October 2012, and he seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with employment in the defense sector. (Item 1.) 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and  1.b.) under Adjudicative Guideline H. 
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant, “used marijuana from approximately
February 2010 to December 20, 2012, at least 8 to 10 times per month.” Applicant
denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR, contending that his frequency of marijuana
usage was at most 2 to 8 times per month and only to combat the symptoms of Charcot
Marie Tooth (CMT) at night. He also wrote, “Though CMT is an incurable progressive
disease I have fortunately not needed to increase frequency of usage over the last 3
years since my original submission [of the SF 86].” (Item 2.)
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant, “intend[s] to continue to use marijuana
indefinitely.” (Item 2.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in his RSOR, writing, “I do
intend to continue to take medical marijuana when needed as long as it continues to
successfully relieve my neuropathic pain, cramping, and muscle spasms caused by
CMT which can affect my ability to sleep.  
2
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
The SOR lists one allegation (2.a.) under Adjudicative Guideline J. 
2.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct, which
creates doubt about a person’s judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness. The specific
allegations are those outlined in Paragraphs 1.a. and 1.b. of the SOR. (Item 4.)
Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR, writing, “I am aware that marijuana is
still classified as a schedule 1 drug and the fact that I am a legal medical marijuana
patient in the State [A] can technically constitute criminal activity according to federal
law.” He also averred that he followed all of the laws of State A for medical marijuana
patients, and he has registered with State A’s department of public health.  (Item 5.)
Current status of the Federal Government’s official policy with regard to state
legalization of marijuana. 
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding the Federal
Government’s official policy with regard to state legalization of marijuana. The
Controlled Substances Act (CSA) makes it illegal under Federal law to manufacture,
possess, or distribute certain drugs, including marijuana. Additionally, the Supreme
Court has ruled that, under the Commerce Clause, Congress may ban the use of
cannabis even when states approve its use for medical purposes. Use or possession of
marijuana continues to be a criminal violation under Federal law - even if such use or
possession complies with a particular state law making possession or use for medical
purposes lawful in that state. Therefore, any use or possession of marijuana, even for
purported medical purposes, continues to raise security concerns under Guidelines H
and J. (Items 8 through 14.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
3
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG ¶ 24:  
      Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgement and because it raises questions about a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, specifically the continued use of marijuana
over the course of several years, and his stated intention to continue to use marijuana 
in the future, which as has been reviewed is a violation of Federal law, is of great
concern, especially in light of his continued desire to have access to the nation's
secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls
within Drug Involvement ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse,” and (c) “illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution.”
4
Because of his intention to continue using marijuana, I cannot find that any of the
mitigating conditions is applicable in this case.
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has used marijuana in the past and will continue using marijuana in the future, under
Guideline H. Applicant, on the other hand, has not introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome the Government's
case against him.  Accordingly, Guideline H of the SOR is concluded against Applicant. 
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
The Government has established that Applicant used marijuana in the past and
will continue using marijuana in the future. Among the disqualifying conditions, I find that
¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” applies in this case. ¶ 31(c),
“allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged,” is also applicable to this case. I do not find that any of the mitigating
conditions under ¶ 32 are applicable. I find Paragraph 2 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct,
against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. As reviewed above, Applicant’s
continued marijuana use and stated desire to continue using marijuana is of great
concern. Additionally, no evidence was introduced as to Applicant’s character, or his
current or past employment records; nor was there any evidence in the record that
would give insight as to Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment.
Based on all of the reasons cited above as to why the disqualifying conditions are
applicable and controlling under Guidelines H and J, I find that the record evidence
5
leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
6
