 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07294 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2016. 
Applicant requested an expedited hearing and waived the notice requirements. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
 
2 
 
 
4, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 11, 2017. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 
2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq. Applicant did not object, and I have 
taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by 
source documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She was born in Iraq. She married her husband, a U.S. 
citizen and military member at the time, in Egypt in 2006. Her husband was honorably 
discharged from the military in 2009. They have no children. They make their home in 
the United States. Applicant received the equivalent of a bachelor’s degree in Iraq in 
1999 and completed a General Equivalency Diploma in the United States. She moved 
to the U.S. in 2007 and became a U.S. citizen in May 2014. She explained that she met 
the requirements to become a U.S. citizen earlier, but due to the cost she delayed filing 
an application. She also explained that she had permanent residence status from 2007 
to 2011, but that time was not counted toward her citizenship requirement because she 
was not living in the United States at the time. She received a special immigration visa 
because of her service with the U.S. armed forces in Iraq.1  
 
 Applicant began working for U.S. government contractors, so she could provide 
financial support to her family. She worked for a defense contractor from August 2003 
until 2007. She changed employers in 2007 and continued to work for this employer 
until April 2011, when she moved to the U.S. to be with her husband. She was 
unemployed for periods, worked part-time for other periods, and went to school until 
2014. She was hired by a defense contractor in March 2015, to work as an interpreter 
for the U.S. military in Iraq. Applicant previously worked for the Iraqi government from 
2003 to 2007. From 2005 to 2006, Applicant was required to show up for her Iraqi job 
one day a month to collect a paycheck. She was working in the Green Zone for a U.S. 
contractor at the same time. She used her Iraqi employment as a cover so her 
neighbors would not know that she was working for U.S. forces. In 2007 she resigned 
from her Iraqi job.2 
                                                          
1 Tr. 24-30. 
 
2 Tr. 30-32, 77-78; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant held an Iraqi passport that expired in February 2015. She has a U.S. 
passport, which she has used for international travel since becoming a citizen.3  
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. Her mother is a retired 
teacher and receives a pension from the Iraqi government. From January 2008 to 
approximately April 2011, Applicant was earning a substantial salary and provided her 
mother $1,000 a month in financial support that her mother used for living expenses. 
Applicant gave her mother $25,000 in 2010 or 2011, so that her mother could purchase 
a small house in Iraq to live in. Applicant anticipates that when her mother passes away, 
she will inherit a share of the property along with her siblings. Applicant testified that she 
has not sent her mother money since April 2011. Her mother sent Applicant some 
money on two occasions when Applicant had financial difficulties.4 
  
When Applicant is in Iraq she cannot leave the compound. She has not seen her 
mother since 2011. They talk on the phone regularly when Applicant is in Iraq and less 
frequently when she is in the United States, due to cost. She maintains regular contact 
with her mother. Her father is deceased. He was retired from the Ministry of Trade. 
Applicant explained that the majority of the jobs in Iraq are with the government. She 
stated that her father was an alcoholic and he never provided sufficient financial support 
for their family’s future.5  
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. She has some contact with 
her brother. He is 44 years old and not married. He lives with their mother. He served in 
the Iraq army after failing in school. He received a dishonorable discharge. The 
circumstances of his discharge are unknown. He worked as a mechanic from 2006 to 
2007. He now sells spare car parts. Applicant hopes he will move to the United States, 
but he is hesitant to learn a new language, and told her that at his age he does not want 
to work hard and start all over. Their mother primarily provides him financial support. 
Although Applicant has contact with her brother, their relationship is presently strained. 
She spoke to him about two months ago.6 
 
 Applicant’s sister is 46 years old. She is a citizen and resident of Iraq. She is an 
employee with a government agency. She will eventually be entitled to a pension from 
the government after 25 years. She is not married and lives with their mother. She helps 
support their mother and brother. Applicant and her sister talk to each other by 
telephone several times a week.7 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 31-33. 
 
4 Tr. 34-39, 50-51, 67-69. 
 
5 Tr. 39-42. 
 
6 Tr. 42-45, 48, 51-52. 
 
7 Tr. 45-48. 
 
4 
 
 
 Since 2005, Applicant’s mother, brother, and sister have been aware that she is 
employed by a U.S. government contractor and is assisting the military. She testified 
that no one except these three family members know that she works for the U.S. 
government. From 2003 to 2005, they were unaware of her employment because she 
was in a hostile location, and she did not want them to worry. From 2004 to 2005, 
during the U.S. surge, while serving with the Marines, she was exposed to dangerous 
situations. She was in a vehicle accident in which two military members were killed and 
another sustained a serious injury. Applicant requested a transfer to a less dangerous 
assignment. When asked on her 2015 counterintelligence-focused security screening 
questionnaire if she had any concerns about working for the U.S. in Iraq, to include 
concerns for the safety of her family members, she responded “yes.” She told the 
investigator, “if militant groups find out that I work with Americans, my family in Iraq 
would be placed in danger.”8 She further indicated that she intended to tell her mother 
and siblings about her recent employment opportunity, but would not disclose where 
exactly in Iraq she will be working. She also stated that she would instruct her mother 
and siblings to keep her information closely guarded.9 
 
 Applicant has two friends, who are married and are Iraqi citizens and have lived 
in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) since 2005. The husband is a businessman and the 
wife is a housewife. They have children and grandchildren. Applicant and the wife grew 
up on the same street in Iraq and have been lifelong friends. The wife was born in the 
U.S. when her father was a diplomat assigned to the United States. She visited 
Applicant in the U.S. in 2012 for about two weeks. Applicant and the wife talk once a 
month by telephone. Applicant has visited the wife in the UAE during her vacation and 
when she has a flight layover in the UAE. Applicant knows her friend’s husband, but 
they are not close.10  
 
 These friends of Applicant are wealthy, and they loaned her $18,000 so Applicant 
and her husband could start a small business. She completed repaying the loan in 
2015. She no longer has a financial obligation to her friend. Applicant’s friend’s husband 
owns an import-export business in the UAE. He inherited much of his wealth. Both 
husband and wife are aware that Applicant works for a U.S. government contractor. 
Applicant testified that neither her family nor friends are aware she is applying for a 
security clearance.11  
 
 In 2006, before she married, Applicant purchased property in Iraq for $3,000. 
She explained that in Iraq there are two options for retirement. One either works for the 
government for 25 years and receives a pension, or buys gold, such as jewelry, or 
property to fund their retirement. At the time, Applicant decided to plan for her future 
                                                          
8 Tr. 45-50, 76-77, 80-81; GE 3 page 9. 
 
9 GE 3 at page 9. 
 
10 Tr. 52-56, 60. 
 
11 Tr. 56-61, 68-69. 
 
5 
 
 
and purchased property as an investment. It is a 300 square foot undeveloped parcel of 
land. Applicant lost the title to the property and plans to give her brother a power of 
attorney, so he can obtain a substitute title and then sell the property for her. She had 
no idea when she purchased the property that she would marry an American and 
become a U.S. citizen and resident. She is no longer planning to retire in Iraq. She 
plans on remaining in the United States and retiring. She listed on her March 2015 
security screen questionnaire that the value of the land was approximately $2,000. She 
has no idea the current value of the Iraqi property. She has no other property or assets 
in Iraq.12 
 
 Applicant and her husband own a home in the U.S. that they purchased in 2009. 
They own two vehicles and a motorcycle. They do not have any outstanding debts. 
They are saving their money. They have friends in their community. Applicant does not 
intend on returning to Iraq to live permanently. She explained that her mother is too old 
to move, so her siblings live with her. Applicant hopes that after her mother passes 
away her siblings will immigrate to the United States.13  
 
 Applicant provided letters of recommendation and certificates of achievement 
from different U.S. military commanders from 2004 to 2008. She is commended for her 
exemplary service and as a valued colleague to military personnel. Her language skills 
are applauded. She is considered a valued and productive employee, who has exhibited 
a strong work ethic and excellent character. She is a trusted team member. It was noted 
that she worked under dangerous conditions while in Iraq, and specifically having 
directly supported U.S. combat operations. Her many accomplishments are noted in the 
letters. She is described as professional, motivated, knowledgeable, and loyal.14  
 
Iraq15 
 
 The United States Department of State warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at 
high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. It is recommended that they avoid all but 
essential travel to Iraq. The potential threat to U.S. Government personnel in Iraq is 
serious and requires them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
 The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of 
Iraq’s territory. Within areas of ISIL control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability to 
control and ensure public safety. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias may threaten U.S. cities 
and western companies throughout Iraq. Violence and attacks by improvised explosive 
devices (IED) occur frequently in many areas of the country. There are numerous 
                                                          
12 Tr. 61-66, 74-75; GE 3 at page 12. 
 
13 Tr. 70-76. 
 
14 AE A. 
 
15 HE I. 
 
6 
 
 
methods of attack including human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines, mortars, and 
rockets. Such attacks take place in public venues.  
 
 Iraq continues to witness a surge in terrorist attacks, primarily as a result of ISIL. 
It continues to be the greatest terrorist threat globally, maintaining formidable forces in 
Iraq, including a large number of foreign terrorist fighters. Despite Iraq’s efforts to 
combat ISIL, there remains a security vacuum in parts of the country.  
 
 Human rights violations are predominantly carried out by ISIL. These included 
attacks on civilians, especially members of other religious and ethnic minorities, women 
and children. The acts of violence committed by ISIL include killings by suicide 
bombers, IEDs, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and other forms of 
executions. Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of transparency at all 
levels of government and society weaken the Iraqi government’s authority and worsen 
human rights protections. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
 
7 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
 
8 
 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country, as well as each individual family 
member’s ties, must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”16 
 
Applicant’s mother, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of Iraq. She has 
regular contact with all three. In the past, she has provided her mother financial support 
and gave her money to purchase a home. Her mother has also provided her with 
financial support. Applicant has a close friendship with a husband and wife who are Iraqi 
citizens living in UAE. She received a loan from these friends. Applicant owns property 
in Iraq.  
 
Terrorist activity, the infiltration of ISIL, sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, 
and lack of transparency at all levels of Iraqi government in addition to its failure to 
protect human rights is a concern. Applicant’s close relationship with her relatives living 
in Iraq creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. Applicant has close 
ties with Iraqi friends who live in UAE that could also create a potential foreign influence 
concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. I have considered the 
value of Applicant’s property in Iraq compared with her assets in the United States. I 
find that it is not a substantial property interest that could subject Applicant to a 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 7(e) does not apply to the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant began working for a U.S. defense contractor in 2003 and continued 
until 2011. She obtained a new job with a defense contractor in 2015. She married a 
U.S. citizen in 2006 and became a U.S. citizen in 2014. Applicant maintains close ties 
with her family in Iraq. They are aware that she works for a U.S. contractor. Applicant is 
concerned for their safety and has told them not to disclose her employment with the 
United States. Kidnappings and terrorist activity are prevalent in Iraq; hence, I am 
unable to find that it is unlikely Applicant’s would be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of her family members and the interests of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply to her family members. However, because Applicant’s 
friends are residents of the UAE, it is unlikely they would be place in such a position. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 8(a) applies to the allegations regarding them.  
 
Applicant is close with her family members in Iraq. She speaks with her mother 
regularly and her sister several times a week and maintains contact with her brother. 
She hopes her siblings will eventually immigrate to the United States. She has provided 
her mother financial assistance and her mother has provided it to her. When in Iraq, 
Applicant is restricted from visiting them because of the security requirements of her 
job. She has expressed concern that if a militant group were to find out about her ties to 
the U.S. forces, they would be in danger. Applicant has loyally served U.S. forces in 
Iraq. However, her close and continuing contact with her family in Iraq and their 
knowledge that she is serving U.S. forces create a conflict of interest. Her familial ties 
are too significant to expect her to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the interests 
of the United States instead of her family. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. Although Applicant 
has close ties with her Iraqi friends living in the UAE, I find that it is unlikely, due to their 
residence, that they will be placed in a position that would create a conflict of interest for 
Applicant. AG ¶ 8(b) applies to them.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to Applicant’s family or Iraqi friends because their 
contact and communication is not casual or infrequent.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 47 years old. She was granted a special immigration visa because of 
her service with U.S. forces in Iraq. She married a U.S. citizen in 2006, and they own a 
home in the United States. She became a naturalized-citizen in 2014. She worked for 
U.S. government contractors from 2003 to 2011, and again in 2015 to the present. She 
was involved in combat operations in 2005. She also has strong familial ties to Iraq 
where her mother, brother, and sister are citizens and residents. She is in close contact 
with her sister and mother, and is concerned for their safety if it were known by terrorists 
that Applicant works for the U.S. Government. I have considered her service under 
dangerous conditions and the special consideration afforded those facts. The Appeal 
Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United 
States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a 
Guideline B case.”17 Although I do not question her service and loyalty to the United 
States, I find that her strong family ties create an insurmountable burden should a 
conflict of interest arise or if she were placed in a position of having to choose between 
her family’s interests and the interests of the United States. Therefore, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
foreign influence security concerns.  
 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.i:   For Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
