 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-04799 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
February 13, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on July 2, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On March 11, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on April 2, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
May 5, 2016. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 11, 2016. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on June 28, 2016. The Government offered Government 
Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A through D, which were also admitted without 
objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until July 15, 2016, to 
permit him to submit additional evidence. On July 13, 2016, he submitted Applicant 
Exhibit E. Department Counsel had no objection and the exhibit was admitted into the 
record, which closed as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
July 8, 2016. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and is applying for a 
security clearance in connection with this employment. He has two children from a prior 
relationship. The children live with their mother and Applicant provides child support. 
(Government Exhibit 1 at Section 18; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant 
admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph. (Answer; Tr. 10.) He 
submitted additional evidence to support his request for access to classified information. 
 
 The SOR lists five delinquent debts, totaling approximately $46,913. The 
existence and amount of the debts is supported by credit reports submitted by the 
Government dated July 15, 2014; January 20, 2016; and May 3, 2016. (Government 
Exhibits 2, 3, and 4.) In addition, Applicant submitted credit reports from each of the three 
credit-reporting services, all dated March 18, 2016. (Applicant Exhibits B, C, and D.)  
 
 The current status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he owed a collection agent $8,489 for a past-due 
student loan debt. In his Answer and at the hearing, Applicant stated that he believed this 
account was a duplicate with the accounts in allegations 1.b and 1.c. (Tr. 26-28, 35-40.) 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant did additional research and discovered that the debt in 
1.b is a separate debt. However, it does appear that the debts in 1.a and 1.c are the same 
debt. Applicant Exhibit E at 21 is the latest payment letter from the creditor stated in 
allegation 1.a. In that letter the creditor in 1.c is specifically cited as being the claimant. 
The document goes on to show, as Applicant had testified, that he has $350 taken out of 
his bank account every month. He has been making payments since at least 2014, as 
 
 
3 
 
 
shown in Government Exhibit 1 at page 43. As of July 6, 2016, the balance had been 
reduced to $6,588.39. This debt is being resolved.  
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted he owed Bank B $14,595 for a past-due student loan. As 
stated, Applicant believed that this was the same debt as that set forth in 1.a and 1.c, but 
he now believes he was mistaken. 
 
 In Applicant Exhibit E at page 3 Applicant writes: 
 
I called the number listed on the credit report for this item, which directed 
me to [Loan Servicer], which is the company that now manages [Bank B] 
student loans. I made multiple attempts to make contact (phone and email), 
but their systems were down for maintenance. I finally had an email get 
through. 
 
 The response from Loan Servicer is found at page 17 of Applicant Exhibit E. In it, 
the Loan Servicer says that Applicant’s Bank B loan was not serviced by them, but they 
were unable to provide information as to who is the current servicer. Applicant states in 
Applicant Exhibit E at 3, “I continue diligently to find a contact that can provide me with 
information for the loan that was charged off, so that I may rectify the issue.” Based on the 
available information the actual status of this debt is uncertain, but it appears to be 
unresolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he owed a past-due student loan that was reported by 
a different collection agency in the amount of $16,574. As stated, this debt is the same as 
that set forth in 1.a., is being resolved, and has been reduced to $6,588.39. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a finance company $4,497 on an unpaid judgment. 
Applicant testified that he thought this was the same debt as that in 1.e, discussed below. 
(Tr. 22-26.) 
 
 In his e-QIP, which was prepared two years before the hearing, Applicant stated 
that this was a different debt from that in 1.e, and that he had paid off the judgment. In 
addition, Applicant did research after the hearing and confirmed that this was a different 
debt than 1.e. He provided copies of bank documents showing that he had paid a law firm 
$5,420 in preauthorized monthly installments from October 2009 through October 2010. 
Applicant also attempted to contact the law firm by email, but was unsuccessful. Based on 
all available information, I find that this debt is resolved. (Government Exhibit 1 at 39-40; 
Applicant Exhibit E at 3-16, 18, 22-24.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a bank $2,398 for a charged-off account. As stated, 
Applicant testified that he thought this was the same debt as 1.d, above. In fact, Applicant 
had previously stated in his 2014 e-QIP that he had paid the debt off, and provided a 
statement from the collection agency confirming that fact. This debt is resolved. 
(Government Exhibit 1 at 41-42; Applicant Exhibit E at 3, 19-20.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Applicant testified about how he wound up in financial trouble. He said, “With the 
payments, it was a combination of having kids, freaking out about that, dealing with 
school and dealing with work and just trying to balance all those is essentially new to adult 
life.” (Tr. 28-29, 32-33.) 
 
 With regard to his student loans, the record shows that Applicant had 
government-provided student loans as well. They have been consolidated and, since 
March 2014, he has been consistently paying on this account without missing any 
payments. (Government Exhibit 4 at 3; Applicant Exhibit C at 2-3.) 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. He is able to maintain his current 
debts, pay child support, and make the agreed payments on his student loans. (Tr. 
44-45.)       
 
Mitigation 
 
  A letter of recommendation was submitted by Applicant’s supervisor. This person 
has known Applicant for two years. The writer describes Applicant as an “exemplary 
employee.” He further states, “[Applicant’s] unwavering commitment and trustworthiness 
is exactly the type of person the United States Government should entrust privileged 
information to.” (Applicant Exhibit A.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and 
mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, 
the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common sense, as well as 
knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned 
decision. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, AThe applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: AAny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two apply to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant, based on documentary and testimonial evidence, had four delinquent 
accounts that he formerly could not resolve. As stated, allegations 1.a and 1.c are the 
same debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions may 
be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ In addition, AG ¶ 20(b) 
states that disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”   
 
 The evidence shows that both of the above mitigating conditions apply to 
Applicant. His financial problems began when he and his girlfriend started a family before 
they were financially ready. They have since separated, and he has been consistently 
making child support payments for several years. In addition, since 2014 he has been 
making consistent monthly payments on two different student loans, one of which is listed 
in the SOR and one that is not. He has also paid off the debts in SOR 1.d and 1.e. 
Applicant showed evidence that he has been attempting to resolve the ownership of the 
debt in 1.b, so that he can pay it. Based on the particular facts of this case, I find that he 
has “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” as 
required by AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. However, as shown above, his 
current financial situation is stable. I find that “there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the DOHA Appeal Board has previously noted 
that the concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is 
required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has “established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
administrative judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ 
 
 
7 
 
 
E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no 
requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of 
such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually 
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.1 That is the 
situation here, where Applicant has been consistently paying off a student loan not listed 
in the SOR. Applicant has acted in a way that shows good judgment, beginning before 
issuance of the SOR to resolve his financial situation. All of these mitigating conditions 
apply to the facts of this case. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I specifically considered the 
current status of Applicant’s debts. I find that there is little or no “potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). In addition, Applicant’s 
attitude about paying his debt shows permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6) 
and there is little likelihood of continuation or recurrence under AG ¶ 2(a)(9). Using the 
whole-person standard, Applicant has mitigated the security significance of his financial 
considerations and is eligible for a security clearance.  
 
 
                                                 
1ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted.)  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                  
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
