                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-07002
           )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
February 23, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) March 28, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On June 14, 2016, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 22, 2016, and he requested a
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge.  This
case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 4, 2016.  A notice of hearing
was issued on November 3, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 6, 2016.  At the
hearing the Government presented nine exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 9 which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented nine
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, which were admitted without
objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of
business on December 30, 2016, to allow the Applicant to submit supplemental
documents.  Applicant submitted one additional documents, admitted without objection
as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on
December 16, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 53 years old, never married, and has no children.  He has a high
school diploma and some technical training.  He is employed with a defense contractor
as a Sustainment Technician and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection
with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR, except 1.a., under
this guideline.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated November 18, 2009; March 12,
2010; April 21, 2015; and September 27, 2016, reflect that the Applicant is indebted to
each of the creditors set forth in the SOR in an amount totaling approximately $30,000. 
(Government Exhibits 4, 5, 6, and 7.)  Applicant has worked for her employer since
2008.  He is seeking to retain his security clearance.
  
Prior to 2006, Applicant and his long-term girlfriend started a landscape
business, and purchased a house.  Their business did well, and their home grew in
equity.  Over the course of a decade, they grew apart, and split up.  The downturn in the
economy negatively effected their business, it was not doing well and eventually closed. 
His girlfriend left, and she had no liability for any of the debts related to the business. 
Applicant sold the house for what he owed and started over.  He stated that he went
into survival mode, and ignored everything else.  He had nowhere to live, and no job.  In
order to get back on his feet, he took the first available job, a job requiring him to travel
extensively, sometimes around the world on a moment’s notice.  He states that this
constant travel caused him to forget about his credit issues.  A number of debts became
delinquent and owing as residue from the relationship and the failed business.  
Applicant admits that has been slow to address his debts.  He claims that he has
been busy dealing with his back injury and its repercussions.  From January 2016
through August 2016, he underwent back surgery, followed by physical therapy, and
rehabilitation.  He was on disability for six weeks, and used this time to clean up his
credit.  (Tr. p. 43.)       
2
1.a.  A judgment was entered against the Applicant in January 2010 in the
approximate amount of $1,423.  This was for a piece of landscape equipment he
purchased for the business in 2007-2008.  Applicant is still looking into this debt, and it
remains outstanding.  (Tr. pp. 55-56.)    
1.b.  A debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $38.  Applicant believes this to be an overdraft on a checking account.  He
provided a copy of a check for $39.43 that paid the debt on June 24, 2016.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit H.)  
1.c.  A debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $23,484.  On September 1, 2016, Applicant set up a payment plan of $400
monthly which is automatically debited from his account payable on the 15  of theth
month.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  
1.d.  A debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $2,758.  About August 2016, Applicant has set up a payment plan where she
is paying $50 monthly that is automatically debited from his account.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit E.)
1.e.  A debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $703.  Applicant states that she settled the account for $400, and it is
resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.) 
1.f.  A debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $476.  Applicant purports that the debt set forth in allegation 1.e. is the same
debt as the one alleged in this allegation.  There was no evidence presented to the
contrary.  Accordingly, this debt was resolved.  (Tr. p. 69.)  
1.g.  A debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $585.  Applicant has paid the debt in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)
Applicant has also resolved other debts not listed in the SOR that include a debt 
for a delinquent telephone bill in the amount of $228.15 that was paid off.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit I.)  Applicant has had no credit counseling, but has handled his situation himself. 
He has a savings account with $1,500, and a checking account with $2,000.  He has no
401K.  His spending is not extravagant.    
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
3
Applicant denied the allegations set forth under this guideline.  He completed an
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing dated March 28, 2015. 
(Government Exhibit 3.)  Section 22 asked, “Have you ever been charged with an
offense involving alcohol or drugs?”  The Applicant answered, “NO,” to the question. 
(Government Exhibit 3.)  This was a false response.  He failed to list his two arrests for
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol in 1989 and 1991.  Applicant stated that his
arrests occurred so long ago that he had convinced himself that it would not be relevant
to list them.  Furthermore, he stated that he does not like putting his past criminal
incidents down, because that is not really who he is, on forms.  (Tr. pp. 82-84.)
     
Section 26 of the same questionnaire asked, “In the past seven years, have you
had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?  Have you have any account or
credit card suspended, charged off or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?  Have you
been over 120 days delinquent on any debt?” After each question he was reminded to
include financial obligations for which he was the sole debtor as well as those for which
he was a cosigner or guarantor.  The Applicant answered, “NO,” to each of the
questions.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  These were false responses.  He failed to list the
financial delinquencies set forth under paragraph 1, above.  
Applicant explained that he did not have his financial records with him and he did
not realize the extent of his indebtedness, or the seriousness of the application. 
Applicant explained that he was on work related travel, while tasked to complete the
security clearance application in a very short time frame.  He stated that he rushed to
answer the questions.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  He further stated that he did not
understand the gravity of the form, and that his company did not explain it to him.  He
believed that he could explain the facts surrounding his financial situation at some later
time.  (Tr. pp. 81-82.)   
 Applicant was not truthful or candid in his responses to the questions regarding
his arrest history on his finances on his security clearance questionnaire.  Applicant
testified in part that, “. . . I hadn’t come to terms with dealing with that portion of my was
life that I had put behind to move forward.” (Tr. p. 79.)  Although he may not have
concealed this information on his security clearance application with malicious intent,
there is no excuse for this misconduct.  The questions on the questionnaire are not
complicated or complex.  Applicant knew or should have known to answer the questions
truthfully and candidly, which he did not.  The only plausible explanation for his failure to
reveal the truth is because he did not want the government to know about it. 
Applicant’s earlier Questionnaire for Public Trust Position dated November 9,
2009, and his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing dated March 1,
2010, were also admitted into evidence.  Applicant gives no mention of any financial
problems on those applications.  (Government Exhibits 1 and 2.)
 
Six letters of recommendation submitted on Applicant’s behalf from his security
officer, coworkers, and friends indicate that he is known to be dependable, responsible,
honest and courteous.  Through his hard work and dedication, he is said to provide a
4
great benefit to our Government.  They all recommend him for a security clearance. 
(Applicant’s Exhibit A.)   
   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
5
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behaviorial
changes;
 
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
6
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility and dishonesty, or
conduct  which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
Furthermore, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  The evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances and 20.(d) the individual
initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts also
applies.  
The evidence shows that Applicant’s failed business venture, caused by the
downturn in the economy, caused his financial problems.  When he started working
again, instead of addressing his debts, he ignored them.  It was not until he injured his
7
back that he took the time to slow down, and take a good look at his delinquent debts,
and how to resolve them.  Applicant did not want to file bankruptcy.  Over the past two
years, he has paid off several debts, and is making payments to resolve others.  The
judgment against him remains owing, but he plans to address it soon.  He has turned
his life around in a meaningful and productive manner.  Based upon the totality of the
evidence, Applicant has shown that he can properly manage his finances.  Accordingly,
I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
In regard to his personal conduct, the same cannot be said.  Applicant was not
truthful and candid with the Government on his security clearance application when he
intentionally omitted relevant information concerning his criminal record and his financial
history.  At the time he completed the application in 2015, he knew or should have
known that he had a number of delinquent debts that occurred within the past seven
years.  He had filed out previous security clearance applications and knew or should
have known their importance.  The only reasonable conclusion for not revealing his
history of indebtedness is because he did not want the Government to know about it. 
There is no excuse for this misconduct, and it has not been mitigated.    
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the Government’s national interest.  In order to show that, Applicant must show that he
is trustworthy, honest and reliable.  According to the standards set forth in the Directive,
based upon the conduct outlined here, this Applicant has demonstrated that he is not
sufficiently trustworthy, and he does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to
classified information. 
    
Applicant has not met his burden of proving that he is worthy of a security
clearance.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case. 
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
8
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his personal conduct, and the effects it can have on his ability to safeguard
classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not overcome
the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph  2 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.          For  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.b.         For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.c.           For  the Applicant. 
Subpara.  1.d.          For  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.e.         For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.f.           For  the Applicant. 
Subpara.  1.g.          For  the Applicant.   
Paragraph 2:                  Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.               Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.b.               Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
9
