 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04101  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his access to 
classified information. Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his relationship 
with his father and his family who are citizens and residents of Russia. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. I issued an 
amended pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses. The parties 
complied with the order. At the hearing, which proceeded as scheduled on July 14, 
2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 and Hearing Exhibits I – III, 
without objection. The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) received the 
transcript (Tr.) on July 22, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
  
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the Russia, specifically its human rights record with its citizens 
and residents as well as the country’s active espionage efforts targeting U.S. interests. 
Applicant did not object to the request, and it was granted. The written summary, along 
with its attachments, is appended to the record as HE III.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 28, received an employment offer from a federal contractor in 2016, 
after completing a summer internship. Applicant completed a security clearance 
application in August 2014, disclosing that his father is a citizen and resident of Russia. 
In his October 2014 interview, Applicant also disclosed that his father’s wife and their 
two children are also citizens and residents of Russia.3 
 
 Applicant was born in Uzbekistan. His parents divorced when he was one year 
old. Applicant and his mother remained in Uzbekistan. Applicant’s father returned to his 
native Russia. In 2004, Applicant’s mother married a U.S. citizen. Shortly thereafter 
Applicant, who was 14 years old, and his mother immigrated to the United States. 
Applicant became a U.S. naturalized citizen in 2011. Because of the influence of his 
step-father, a scientist whom Applicant cites as his father-figure, Applicant has chosen 
to pursue a career in the Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) 
field. He is not married, but has been in a relationship with his girlfriend since high 
school. They have lived together since 2007, and are parents to three children ages 8, 
3, and 1 year old.4  
 
 Applicant’s father continues to live in Russia with his family. In the 13 years 
before he immigrated to the United States, Applicant saw his father only three times. In 
2006, when he was 17, Applicant traveled to Russia to visit his father. He returned to 
Russia in 2010 with his girlfriend and their first child so that Applicant could introduce 
them to his paternal grandmother, with whom he remained close, and his father. They 
                                                          
2 Tr. 18. 
 
3 Tr. 16-18, 22; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 16-20. 
 
3 
 
spent the majority of the trip in his grandmother’s village. Applicant traveled to Russia 
alone in 2014 to commemorate the first anniversary of his paternal grandmother’s 
death. Applicant took his most recent trip to Russia in 2015 with his girlfriend and two 
children. Before the trip, Applicant, who was in an internship with a federal contractor, 
sought guidance from his security office to ensure that he was in compliance with 
security guidelines.5 
 
 During each of these trips, Applicant spent some time with his father; however, 
the majority of the trips were spent visiting tourist attractions. Although Applicant has 
met his father’s wife and their two children, ages 6 and 3, he does not maintain ongoing 
contact with them. Applicant speaks to his father a few times a year on birthdays and 
holidays. Applicant’s father has never traveled to the United States and at the time of 
the hearing, Applicant had no plans to return to Russia. His father is an entrepreneur. 
Applicant believes that his father imports clothing, but does not know any other details 
of his father’s business. Applicant has not shared any details of his own professional 
pursuits with his father.6 
 
 Having earned his graduate degree in May 2016, Applicant and his girlfriend, 
who provides the family’s primary source of income, do not have significant assets. 
However, they are very active in their university community as well as their oldest son’s 
school. Applicant and his family also spend time with his mother and step-father, who 
are very involved in their grandchildren’s lives.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
5 Tr. 19, 24, 32-33. 
 
6 Tr. 20, 26, 28-29. 
 
7 Tr. 12-23, 29-30, 34, 43.  
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”8 Applicant’s father, his wife, 
and their two young children are residents and citizens of Russia, a country with 
significant human rights problems, marked by restrictions on civil liberties, discrimination, 
denial of due process, forced confessions, torture, other prisoner mistreatment, and the 
government’s failure to prosecute officials who commit serious violations. Government 
officials also engage in electronic surveillance without proper authorization.9  
 
Russia is one of the most aggressive countries conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining proprietary information and advanced weapons 
technologies beneficial to Russia’s military modernization and economic development. 
Russia’s intelligence services as well as private companies and other entities frequently 
seek to exploit persons with family ties to Russia, who can use their insider access to 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 6.  
 
9 HE III. 
 
5 
 
corporate networks to steal secrets.10 As a result, Applicant’s relationships with his 
Russian relatives create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, and coercion or potentially raise a conflict of interest for Applicant.11  
 
However, Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate the foreign 
influence concerns raised by these relationships. Even with the infrequent contact, 
Applicant’s relationships with his father, step-mother, and young half-siblings cannot be 
considered casual. However, it does not appear that Applicant is bound to his Russian 
relatives by strong bonds of affection or obligation. Applicant’s relationship with his 
father is better characterized as respectful, but not close or intimate. Applicant does not 
maintain any contact with his father’s wife or his two young half-sisters. Furthermore, 
Applicant is firmly rooted to the United States by the presence of his nuclear family as 
well as his girlfriend and their three children. When the strength of Applicant’s U.S. ties 
are weighed against his relationships with his Russian relatives, Applicant’s sense of 
loyalty and obligation to the latter is so minimal that he can be respected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of U.S. interest.12  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant does not have divided 
loyalties between the United States and Russia. Aside from the presence of his father 
and his family in Russia, Applicant has no independent ties or affinity toward that 
country. Furthermore, during his internship with a federal contractor, Applicant showed 
an understanding of the importance of the security concerns and procedures related to 
having foreign contacts and travelling internationally. His actions to comply with security 
policy before becoming a clearance holder demonstrates a high level of security 
consciousness that suggests he will properly handle and safeguard classified 
information in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
10 HE III.  
 
11 AG ¶ 7(a) – (b). 
 
12 AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.                                              
 
 
 
______________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
