   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-02203 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 19 delinquent debts totaling 
$20,708. Applicant did not make sufficient documented progress resolving the debts 
alleged in his SOR. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On August 21, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Item 3) On October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant an SOR pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865,  Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. The SOR set forth security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. (Item 1)  
 
On January 4, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she requested 
a decision without a hearing. (Item 2) On March 28, 2016, Department Counsel completed 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On April 8, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. 
   
 
2 
 
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On January 28, 2017, the case was assigned to 
me. The Government’s case consisted of seven exhibits. (Items 1-7) Applicant did not 
object to any of the Government exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.s 
without elaboration. (Item 2) Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old, and she has been employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2014. She has also been employed by a home-health employer since April 
2013.2 In 1989, she received a high school diploma. From 2013 to 2014, she attended a 
junior college. From 1993 to 2013, she was employed as an operator. She has never 
served in the military. In 1993, she married, and in 2007, she divorced. She has two 
children who were born in 1993, and in 1994. (Item 5) There is no evidence that she 
violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs. 
There is no evidence of employer performance evaluations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by underemployment, and she had 
some medical debts. (Item 5) Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, SCA, Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview, and 
SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleged 19 delinquent debts totaling $20,708. Ten of her 
SOR debts were related to medical treatment and ranged from $84 to $2,000. (Item 1; 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($2,000), 1.e ($775), 1.f ($772), 1.h ($571), 1.j-1.m ($100 each), 1.n ($84), 
and 1.q ($162)) Her largest SOR debt was a charged-off debt owed to a bank for $6,953. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) Six SOR debts are for $100 or less.   
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. The file lacks 
any evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise 
resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. Applicant did not provide a budget or 
personal financial statement. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the 
receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, 
rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any 
objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an 
Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this 
FORM. (FORM at 2-3)  
  
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s August 21, 
2014, Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA).  
   
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
   
 
4 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in her credit reports and SOR response. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
   
 
5 
 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
6 
 
 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what she did to address her SOR 
debts. She did not describe receipt of financial counseling. She did not provide sufficient 
documentation relating to any of her SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking 
account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he 
paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from creditors to 
establish maintenance of contact;4 (3) credible debt disputes indicating she did not 
believe she was responsible for the debts and why she held such a belief; (4) more 
evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or 
agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence 
of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) 
because she did not provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or 
the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving her SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that her financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all 
the circumstances, she failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                            
4“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
   
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old, and she has been employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2014, and a home-health employer since April 2013. From 1993 to 2013, 
she was employed as an operator. In 1993, she married, and in 2007, she divorced. She 
has two children who were born in 1993, and in 1994. There is no evidence that she 
violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs.   
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for 19 delinquent SOR debts totaling $20,708. Six 
SOR debts were for $100 or less. She provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating 
documentary evidence of payments and established payment plans for her SOR debts. 
Her actions show lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated 
questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts, financial history, 
or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of her past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be 
able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
  
   
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
