 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  15-03160  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 16, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 13, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on June 15, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 13, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled.  Applicant testified on his own behalf.  The Government offered Exhibits 
(GXs) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits 
 
2 
 
(AppXs) A through I, which were admitted without objection. Pursuant to Applicant’s 
requests, I left the record open until September 12, 2016, so that he could offer 
additional Exhibits.  On July 31, 2016, he offered AppX J, and on September 9, 20016, 
he offered AppX K; both of which we admitted without objection into evidence. The 
record then closed on September 12, 2016.  On January 2, 2017, Applicant offered an 
additional Exhibit, marked as Appellate Exhibit 1.  Department Counsel objected to this 
submission, which was nearly four months after the record was closed.  This objection 
was sustained.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR.) on July 22, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. (GX 1 at page 5.)  He has been employed with a 
Government contractor for 7 years.  (GX 1 at page 12.) He has held a security 
clearance since August of 2000.  (GX 1 at page 42.) He is not married and has no 
children. (GE 1; Tr. 19-22, 75.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR alleges 
a failure to file state income tax returns from 2009~2013, identified tax liens totaling 
more than $3,000 (allegations 1.b. and 1.d. being one and the same lien), and a  past-
due debt of $355. In his Answer, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegations; 
and as such, I consider them denied.  The alleged liens and debts were listed on credit 
reports dated April of 2001, November of 2004, September of 2014, and May of 2016. 
(GXs 5~8.) 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
 1.e.  It is alleged that Applicant failed to file his state income tax returns for tax 
years 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013.  He was not required to file in this state for tax 
year 2009; and he has filed for tax year 2010, as established by evidence that 
corroborates his testimony.  (TR at page 38 line 10 to page 46 line 14, TR at page 54 
lines 13~20, and AppXs F and G.)  As for tax years 2011, 2012 and 2013, Applicant has 
yet to file those state income tax returns.1   (TR at page 38 line 10 to page 46 line 14, 
and at page 54 line 21 to page 55 line 1.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d.  Applicant has satisfied his state tax liens by having his wages 
garnished.  (TR at page 46 line 15 to page 53 line 24, at page 55 lines 3~10; and AppXs 
C, D and H.)  These allegations are found for Applicant. 
 
 1.c.  Applicant has yet to satisfy a past-due medical debt for about $355.  This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
  
                                                          
1 Appellant Exhibit 1 refers to tax year 2014; and as such, is not relevant to these filings. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual . . . state . . . income tax returns as required. 
 
 From 2011~2013, Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent tax 
debt, as he failed to file state income tax returns for those tax years. His actions 
demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 These are not applicable here.  Applicant continues to be delinquent in his state 
tax filings, and has failed to address a medical debt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Although Applicant does 
have the support of his friends (AppX J, and K at page 5), overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against  Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
