1  
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
HULL, Forrest Lee                              ) ISCR Case No. 15-04628 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
________ 
 
Decision 
________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that his financial problems are under control. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on April 
13, 2014. On January 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on February 26, 2016, and requested a 
decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant by transmittal letter dated April 5, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on April 
14, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant responded to the 
FORM via a one-page statement, dated May 12, 2016 (included in the case file). In an 
email dated May 12, 2016, Department Counsel asked Applicant whether he intended to 
 
 
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
2  
submit any additional evidence. No additional response was received. The case was 
assigned to me on February 13, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
his unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background 
investigator from June 11, 2014. Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant responded to the FORM, submitted one document, but raised no 
objections. I admitted the document and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s response, he did not admit any of the SOR allegations. Regarding 
SOR ¶ 1.a, he claimed he had contacted the creditor’s legal representative to make 
payment arrangements or to pay off the debt. He promised to submit documentation of 
his contact, but failed to do so. He also claimed he had paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.j, and promised to provide documentary evidence of the payments. He 
failed to do so. Applicant stated he was disputing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 
1.i. The credit reports in evidence show he disputed some of his debts. 
 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, including Applicant’s 2014 SCA, 
his answer to the SOR, and his response to the FORM, I make the following findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is 46 years old, and he is employed with a federal contractor. He 
graduated from high school in 1988, and completed some college courses, but did not 
earn a degree. He has been married and divorce twice. His last divorce took place in 
2010. He has a 20-year-old son. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
1993 through 1997. He enlisted in the active reserve in 1999, where he served until 2003. 
He received an honorable discharge on both occasions. 
 
Applicant’s work history shows he was employed with a private company from 
1997 to 1999; served in the active reserve from 1999 to 2003; and worked for federal 
contractors between 2003 and 2011. He was unemployed from November 2011 to March 
2012; employed from March 2012 to November 2013; and unemployed from November 
2013 to April 2014, when he submitted his 2014 SCA. As of his June 2014 interview, he 
had been employed part time since April 2014. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated 
that he was fully employed and promised to continue resolving his financial problems. He 
was granted security clearances in 2000 and 2013. 
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2014 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he had financial problems and revealed some of his delinquent debts. In 
3  
his 2014 SCA, Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his periods of unemployment. 
He claimed that he had been in contact with his creditors, and reassured them that he 
would pay his debts when he started working full time. 
 
During his June 2014 interview, the government investigator confronted Applicant 
with the fact that he was fired from his job in 2011, and he failed to disclose it in his 2014 
SCA. Applicant explained he was never told he was fired from his job. The investigator 
also confronted Applicant with numerous delinquent debts he failed to disclose in his 
SCA. Applicant admitted the debts; explained he did not remember them; and claimed 
that he had been in contact with some of his creditors and told them he would pay his 
debts when he found a full-time job. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation uncovered the ten delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR, which are established by the record credit reports, his June 2014 statement, 
his answer to the SOR, and his response to the FORM. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant professed his honesty, and stated he believed 
he was making an appropriate level of effort to resolve his debts since he became fully 
employed. He explained he became delinquent on his debts when he was unemployed. 
He claimed he went through a very difficult time and had to disregard his debts to provide 
for his and his son’s living expenses. He highlighted his Navy service and his loyalty to 
the United States. He promised to continue paying his debts now that he was fully 
employed. Applicant averred he had recently attended a financial counseling course that 
help him to maintain his budget. 
 
Credit reports show Applicant disputed some debts, but he provided no evidence 
of the status of those disputes. The 2016 credit report show a judgment against Applicant, 
four delinquent accounts, and three accounts paid and closed. 
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show that he has been in contact 
with his creditors, or that he attempted to settle or pay his delinquent debts. He promised 
during his June 2014 interview to document his contacts with his creditors and show 
evidence of his payment of some debts. Additionally, in his February 2016 answer to the 
SOR, he also promised to submit documentary evidence of his payments and contacts 
with creditors. He failed to do so. 
 
Applicant provided no information about his current financial position. He did not 
provide any information about his current income, monthly expenses, and whether his 
income is sufficient to pay his living expenses and debts. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
4  
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered. 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance. 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
5  
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, his 
2014 interview, and his 2016 SOR response. The evidence establishes the delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
6  
Applicant receives credit for paying some debts and disputing others. 
Notwithstanding, none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show 
that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. He claimed his debts resulted from his unemployment. 
However, Applicant presented insufficient information to establish circumstances beyond 
his control and that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. The record 
evidence shows Applicant was fired from his job. As such, I cannot consider his 
unemployment as a circumstance beyond his control. 
 
Applicant presented no evidence of efforts taken to remain in contact with his 
creditors, or of efforts he has taken to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. Even assuming, 
for argument sake, that he was not fired from his job, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient 
to establish that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant was in the service and worked for federal contractor during many years 
holding a security clearance. He knew about, and was further made aware of the 
Government’s financial considerations security concerns when he completed his 2014 
SCA, when he received the SOR, and when he was provided the FORM. He was allowed 
a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and 
mitigation. He failed to provide any documentary evidence to show he has been in contact 
with his creditors, or that he attempted to settle or pay his delinquent debts since he 
acquired them. Applicant also failed to establish that he has sufficient income to keep his 
debts in current status and to pay his delinquent debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
I considered Applicant’s service and his work for federal contractor while holding 
a security clearance. Notwithstanding, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to 
show his financial responsibility. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence of 
payments to the SOR creditors or of efforts to resolve his debts, except for some debts 
he disputed. There is insufficient evidence of progress addressing his financial problems. 
The available information is insufficient to establish clear indications that he does not have 
a current financial problem, or that his financial problems are being resolved, or are under 
control. Applicant failed to establish that he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed 
as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary 
7  
for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior consistent 
with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
