KEYWORD:  Guideline B
DIGEST:  We find the Judge committed harmful error by making a whole-person assessment
that runs contrary to the record evidence.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASE NO:  15-07242.a1
DATE:  02/09/2017
DATE:  February 9, 2017
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07242
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan K. Hahn, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
12, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
November 8, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.   Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge erred in her whole-
person assessment; whether the Judge failed to consider a mitigating condition; and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we remand the decision.   
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He became a U.S. citizen in
1994 and earned a bachelor’s degree and master’s degree in the United States.  
Applicant’s wife was born in China and grew up there.  She came to the United States in
2008 to pursue a master’s degree.  They married in early 20161 and reside together in the United
States.  She works for a U.S. corporation and frequently travels to China to perform work there.  As
part of her job, she deals with Chinese governmental and non-governmental entities.  She recently
applied for a green card to become a permanent resident alien, but has no plans to become a U.S.
citizen.  They recently purchased a home in the United States and plan to raise a family here. 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of China.  They own
property in China.  As their only children, Applicant’s wife stands to inherit the property in China. 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a general contractor for a U.S. company.2  At one point, he was a
member of the Communist Party, but no longer considers himself a part of it because he has not paid
dues in 20 years.  Applicant’s mother-in-law is a homemaker.  Applicant’s wife communicates with
her parents a few times a week.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s wife is a Chinese citizen, travels to China on a frequent basis, works directly
with the Chinese government, and has no plans to become a U.S. citizen.  She maintains regular
contact with her parents, and her father was at one time a member of the Communist Party.  These
circumstances pose a potential threat to the United States.  Under Guideline B, disqualifying
1 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s girlfriend is a citizen of China and her parents are citizens and residents
of that country.  At the time the SOR was issued, the Personnel Security Specialist who signed that document was
apparently unaware of Applicant’s  marriage. 
2  The evidence reflects that Applicant’s father-in-law is not a general contractor, but a general manager of a
U.S. company’s facility in China.
conditions 7(a),3 7(b),4 and 7(d)5 apply.
The Judge concluded that mitigating condition 8(b)6 applied, but was not controlling because
Applicant’s wife could be a potential target for foreign influence.  The Judge also stated:
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case,
the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines
as a whole supports a whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.7
Discussion
 A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
3 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(a) states, “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion[.]” 
4 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(b) states, “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligations to protect sensitive information or technology
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information[.]” 
5 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(d) states, “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion[.]”
6 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b) states, “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
7 Decision at 7.
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole-person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at
3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Applicant contends the Judge committed harmful error in her whole-person analysis. 
Specifically, he argues that there is no evidence in the record supporting the Judge’s “whole-person
assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, and unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard classified information.”  In the appeal brief, Applicant points to numerous
reference letters offered into evidence as well as the testimony of a supervisor that attest to his good
character and professionalism.  The substance of the reference letters and the supervisor’s testimony
was not addressed in the Judge’s decision.  Based on our review of the record, we found no evidence
supporting the negative comments in the Judge’s whole-person assessment.8  Accordingly,  we find
the Judge committed harmful error by making a whole-person assessment that runs  contrary to the
record evidence.9      
Applicant also contends that the Judge did not address mitigating condition 8(a)10 in her
decision.  Based on the record evidence, we agree with Applicant’s contention mitigating condition
8(a) should have been analyzed in this case.  Applicant raised other appeal issues, but it would be
premature to address those other issues at this time.
Applicant has demonstrated error that warrants remand.  Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.33.2.,
the Board remands the case to the Administrative Judge for the issuance of a new decision that
corrects the errors identified above. 
8 In his closing statement, Department Counsel referred to Applicant as “a young man of integrity.” 
9 We note that the Judge has used the same language in another case (ISCR Case No. 15-04340 at 2-3 (App.
Bd. Jan. 30, 2017)) where there was no evidence to support an adverse conclusion regarding Applicant’s candor. 
10 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(a) states, “ the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.[.]”
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed:  Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
