 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-06639 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past tax issues. He did not timely file his tax returns due to a combination of a 
genuine misunderstanding as to his filing requirements and matters beyond his control. 
He addressed his overdue tax returns, receiving refunds from the federal government 
totaling nearly $38,000. He has taken positive steps to meet all his financial obligations 
going forward, including the obligation of all citizens to timely file their tax returns and 
pay their taxes. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the financial considerations and foreign influence guidelines.1 Applicant, through 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
his counsel, answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 On December 13, 2016, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was 
held.2 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw the foreign influence 
allegations and, without objection, the motion to amend the SOR was granted. 
Department Counsel initially offered Government Exhibits 1 – 4, but withdrew Exhibit 2 
upon Applicant’s timely objection.3 The remaining exhibits offered by Department 
Counsel, Applicant’s Exhibits A – E, and the documents attached to the Answer were 
admitted into the administrative record.4 Applicant was the only witness who testified at 
the hearing. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 20, 2016. 
 
 On December 29, 2016, after reviewing the transcript and the record evidence, I 
advised the parties that the matter appeared appropriate for summary disposition in 
Applicant’s favor. Department Counsel objected to the resolution of the case through 
summary disposition and requested a full decision.5 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a defense contractor and provides information technology support to 
the U.S. military. He has been with his current employer since January 2014. He served 
in the U.S. military for 10 years from 1982 to 1992. His military service included several 
overseas deployments and service during the First Gulf War. After separating from 
active duty in 1992 and receiving an honorable discharge, Applicant began working as a 
federal contractor. He has held a security clearance without issue since 1982. Outside 
of work, Applicant is involved in his community, mentoring underprivileged, at-risk youth.  
 
 From approximately 1992 to 2001, Applicant worked overseas as a U.S. 
Government contractor. His employer provided assistance in completing and filing his 
tax returns. From 2001 to 2010, Applicant, with the assistance of a tax preparer, 
completed and filed his own tax returns. These tax returns were filed on time.  
 
 Applicant did not timely his federal and state tax returns for tax years 2010 
through 2014. He explained at hearing that he was under the mistaken belief that since 
he was owed a refund for each of these years (as he always had more taxes withheld 
                                                          
2 Prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order were marked and 
attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – III.  
 
3 Exhibit 2 for identification was a summary of Applicant’s security clearance interview. Applicant objected 
to its admission. See Directive, Enclosure 3, E3.1.20. Department Counsel then withdrew the offered 
exhibit before I could rule upon its admission. Therefore, Exhibit 2 is not included in the administrative 
record nor did I consider it.  
 
4 I overruled Applicant’s relevancy objection to Exhibit 4. (Tr. 11-12) It, as well as Exhibits 1 and 3, were 
admitted into the administrative record and considered in assessing the security concerns at issue.  
 
5 App. Exh. IV.  
 
3 
 
 
from his pay than he expected to owe) that he had three years to both file the return and 
claim the refund. If he failed to file his return within the allotted time, Applicant 
understood that he would forfeit his refund. He was also under the mistaken impression 
that he owed no state income tax because in 2009 he moved from State A to State B, 
which did not have a state income tax. It was only later that Applicant became aware 
that he had to file a tax return with State A and owed the state income taxes, because 
he kept his home there.  
 
 Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that he filed his 2010 – 2014 
federal tax return within three years of when they were due and received refunds 
totaling nearly $38,000. His IRS account transcripts (Exhibit A) reflect the following: 
 
Tax Year Date return filed Tax refund (or, tax owed) 
2010 10/22/2012 ($350, paid, $0 balance) 
2011 10/29/2012 $5,100 
2012 8/25/2014 $12,100 
2013 6/13/2016 $4,725 
2014 6/13/2016 $8,880 
2015 6/20/2016 $6,900 
 
Applicant also submitted documentary evidence to corroborate his testimony that he 
filed his overdue state tax returns and paid any taxes owed. He has obtained the 
assistance of a tax professional to assist him in filing his tax returns in future years.  
 
 Applicant also explained at hearing that he did not timely file his tax returns 
because of several matters beyond his control. Specifically, in 2011, Applicant received 
a short-notice assignment to work on a U.S. Government contract at an overseas base. 
He helped his wife move back to their home in State A, but left for the assignment 
before fully unpacking and locating the boxes containing the necessary tax documents. 
In 2015, he was the victim of a computer virus or malware that impacted his ability to 
review his tax forms and file his returns by the deadline.  
 
 SOR 1.a and 1.b reflect Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal and state tax 
returns for tax years 2010 – 2014. He disclosed this adverse information on the security 
clearance application (Exhibit 1), which he submitted as part of the clearance 
reinvestigation. SOR 1.c alleges a charged-off debt. Applicant was unemployed in 2013, 
and incurred this medical debt. He researched the debt, located the creditor, and paid 
the debt. The record evidence reflects no other derogatory financial information in the 
past 10 years.6 A March 2016 credit report (Exhibit 3) reflects that Applicant pays his 
accounts “as agreed,” including the fixed-rate, 30-year mortgage on his home.  
                                                          
6 Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2003. He filed for bankruptcy after a costly 
divorce, which was on the heels of being unemployed for a lengthy period time and then having to take a 
job paying far less than he previously earned. The bankruptcy was not alleged in the SOR and, thus, was 
not considered for disqualification purposes. However, I have considered it in assessing Applicant’s 
mitigation case and overall suitability for continued access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant earns a yearly salary of approximately $140,000. He owns a home, has 
nearly $10,000 in a savings account to pay unanticipated expenses, and about $25,000 
in a retirement account. His personal financial statement reflects that, after paying 
recurring monthly expenses, he has a positive net monthly remainder. His recent 
performance appraisal reflects favorably on his job performance, and a long-time 
coworker submitted a character reference stating, under oath, his favorable opinion of 
Applicant’s character and suitability for a clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 An individual who is granted access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file his 2010 – 2014 tax returns raises this security 
concern and, specifically, the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(c) and 19(g). 
Once a disqualifying condition is established, the burden shifts to an applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. In the present case, Applicant bears a heavy 
burden in mitigating the heightened security concerns raised by his late tax filings.7  
 
 The adjudicative guidelines list conditions that can mitigate security concerns 
raised by an applicant’s past conduct and current circumstances. Here, the record 
evidence raised the following mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                                          
7 See generally ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, as follows:  “A security clearance represents an 
obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file his tax returns was primarily a result of his 
genuine, but incorrect belief that he had three years within which to file his returns.8 He 
was also unable to timely file some of his returns due to matters largely beyond his 
control. However, one would expect an individual with Applicant’s age and experience 
to have hired a professional to assist him in preparing and filing his returns. By failing to 
take this otherwise prudent step, Applicant created the financial problems at issue that 
raised questions about his continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
 Applicant, however, did take concrete, responsible action to address and resolve 
his past tax issues and avoid similar problems in the future. He filed the 2010 tax 
returns, which were originally due in 2011, a year later in 2012. This is the only tax year 
for which he owed federal taxes and he paid that debt in 2012. He did not owe federal 
taxes for the other tax years at issue and, more importantly, after being made aware 
that he was mistaken as to the tax filing requirement, secured the assistance of a 
professional and filed his overdue federal tax returns. He also addressed his overdue 
state tax filings. The record evidence reflects that he currently manages his personal 
finances in a responsible manner and has taken the necessary steps to meet all his 
financial obligations going forward, including the obligation to file his tax returns and pay 
his taxes.9 After thoroughly reviewing and considering the record evidence, I find that 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply, either in full or in part, and together with the whole-
person factors noted herein mitigate the security concerns at issue.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
                                                          
8 I found Applicant’s testimony on this issue credible. His testimony was wholly consistent with the record 
evidence. Notably, the IRS account transcripts reflect that for all the years in question, except one, 
Applicant was owed a sizeable refund and he filed all the returns at issue within three years. Applicant 
also submitted documentation with his Answer reflecting the type of information he reviewed from official 
U.S. Government websites, which could lead a reasonable person to be misled as to when a tax return is 
due when s/he expects a refund. Moreover, I had an opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor at 
hearing and found him credible.  
 
9 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (resolution of overdue tax filing alone 
insufficient to mitigate heightened security concerns, where no evidence of financial reform or extenuating 
circumstances to explain the late filing); ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016) (same); 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (same). 
 
7 
 
 
non-exclusive factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were not the result of frivolous or reckless 
spending. He was not trying to evade paying his taxes or deliberately violating the law. 
Instead, he incorrectly conflated the time period allowed for claiming a refund before it is 
forfeited and when a tax return must be filed. He voluntarily disclosed the information 
regarding his overdue tax returns on his security clearance application and, during the 
processing of his case, provided extensive tax documents, notably, his IRS account 
transcripts and his state tax returns. This level of cooperation and candor provides 
some measure of assurance that the Government can continue to entrust him with the 
responsibility of properly discharging his security obligations, including the duty to 
disclose potentially adverse information. Additionally, in assessing Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and other pertinent character traits, I extended favorable consideration to his 
years of service, both in and out uniform, good employment record, favorable character 
reference, and community involvement.  
 
 After weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant 
met his heavy burden of persuasion. He mitigated the security concerns at issue and 
established his eligibility for continued access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       WITHDRAWN 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:        Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
