 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-03495  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence of the resolution of any of the alleged 
delinquent debts, which totaled over $100,000. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015 (Answer), and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 2.) On March 22, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight 
Items, was mailed to Applicant. He received it on March 30, 2016. The FORM notified 
him that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He did not submit any 
additional information or objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 
8 are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on January 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR, and asserted that he 
paid or made arrangements to pay many debts, and that some debts were charged-off 
and no longer valid. (Item 2.) His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and a high school graduate. He married his wife in 
1993. They have three children. He worked for a private company from 2003 until 2008, 
when he started a position with a defense contractor. In August 2009, he completed a 
security clearance application (SCA).   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from March 2015 and May 2013, and a 
2011 Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing, the SOR alleged debts, totaling $111,507, which 
became delinquent between 2008 and 2014. (Items 5, 7, 8.) The status of each of the 
alleged debts is as follows: 
 
1. (SOR ¶ 1.a) In September 2011, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He 
paid $2,700 into the payment plan. In March 2012, the case was dismissed 
because Applicant failed to continue making payments. (Items 2, 4, 6.) 
Sixteen debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a (1) through (16)) were included in that bankruptcy 
and totaled $107,331. Applicant stated that he paid several of those debts or 
made payment arrangements for them. He said some were charged-off and 
were no longer being collected. (Item 2.) He did not submit proof of payments 
made, payment plans negotiated, or a reason he is no longer responsible for 
charged-off accounts. All of these 16 debts are unresolved.  
 
2.  (SOR ¶ 1.b) The $2,007 debt is owed for a personal loan. There is no 
evidence that this debt is resolved or being resolved. However, it is alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a (1) through (16).  
 
3.  (SOR ¶ 1.c) The $1,944 debt is owed for a personal loan. There is no 
evidence that this debt is resolved or being resolved. However, it is alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a (1) through (16). 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
4. (SOR ¶ 1.d) The $100 debt is owed for a medical bill. There is no evidence 
that this debt is resolved or being resolved. 
 
5. (SOR ¶ 1.e) The $63 debt is owed for a medical bill. There is no evidence that 
this debt is resolved or being resolved. 
 
6. (SOR ¶ 1.f) The $62 debt is owed for a medical bill. There is no evidence that 
this debt is resolved or being resolved. 
 
 Applicant did not submit evidence that he obtained credit or financial counseling, 
or sought other assistance to resolve his delinquent debts since March 2012 when his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed. He did not provide a current budget or a plan to 
address the delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2 (a) and (c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debt. From at least 2008 to 2014, he 
accumulated delinquent accounts, totaling over $100,000, which remain unresolved.  
This pattern of delinquent debt, and inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raises 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to produce evidence that he addressed any of alleged delinquent 
accounts or that similar problems are unlikely to recur. He provided no evidence that the 
delinquencies were caused by conditions beyond his control, or that he acted 
responsibly under those circumstances. He presented no evidence of financial 
counseling. There are no clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved 
in good faith, or are under control. He did not present documentation that he formally 
disputed any of the SOR-listed debts and that they have been resolved in his favor. 
Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the above 
conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
alleged in the SOR. After submitting his Answer, the Government notified him in its 
FORM that he failed to provide documentation corroborating statements in his Answer 
that many debts were paid or being paid. He was given 30 days to submit proof of the 
debts’ status, but he did not do so. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt 
as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:        For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.f:         Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
