                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06430
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his failure to file his
federal and state income tax returns, and by his other financial problems. His request
for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 16, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew his eligibility for a security clearance required
for his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue
to hold a security clearance.  1
On February 19, 2016, DOD issued an SOR alleging facts which raise security
concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for financial considerations2
(Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
1
hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2016, and I convened a hearing on
August 10, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3.  Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits3
(Ax.) A - D. All exhibits were admitted without objection. A transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
was received on August 19, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant did not file his federal
income tax returns (SOR 1.a) or his state income tax returns (SOR 1.b) as required for
the 2012 and 2013 tax years. It was also alleged that Applicant owed $69,348 for past-
due or delinquent payments on a mortgage with a balance of $338,825 (SOR 1.c).
Further, the Government alleged that Applicant owed another $8,603 for six other
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.d - 1.i). In response, Applicant denied SOR 1.d,
and 1.g - 1.i. He admitted the remaining allegations. He also provided explanatory
remarks with each response. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s
admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 60 years old. He works for a defense contractor in a position that
requires eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant has worked for his
current employer since August 2013. After serving on active duty in the U.S. Navy until
1981, he obtained his college degree in financial management while serving in the Navy
Reserve. He then embarked on a career in the defense industry. He was first granted a
security clearance in 1976.  (Gx. 1; Tr. 78 - 81)
Applicant and his wife have been married since May 2014, He was married twice
before. Applicant’s first wife died in March 2003, after 14 years of marriage. They had
three children, now grown, together. Applicant raised them largely by himself. A second
marriage in 2004 ended in divorce three years later. (Gx. 1)
Applicant was laid off from a previous contractor position in January 2009. He
remained unemployed until being hired for his current job 18 months later. In 2008, he
had refinanced the mortgage on a home and land he had first purchased in 2002. His
oldest child was in college and he was supporting all three of his children alone. After
becoming unemployed, Applicant had trouble paying his mortgage and meeting other
financial obligations. He was unable to sell his property to cover his mortgage because
of the recession and associated decline in the housing market. In his EQIP, he
disclosed that he had resolved a significant debt for unpaid mortgage through a short-
sale in 2011. That debt was alleged at SOR 1.c; however, Applicant established at
hearing that he satisfied his mortgage obligation through a short-sale completed in
March 2011. Applicant does not know why the debt is listed as a foreclosure. (Answer;
Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. A; Ax. B; Tr. 36 - 37, 44, 56)
Applicant also disclosed in his EQIP that he had not filed his federal and state
income taxes, as required, for the 2012 and 2013 tax years. In May 2015, he was
interviewed during his background investigation by a government investigator. Applicant
discussed his financial difficulties and his failure to file his tax returns. Applicant had
struggled to pay his taxes for 2011. After filing for extensions for the 2012 and 2013
returns, Applicant decided not to file his returns for each year because he felt he would
not be able to pay those tax bills. In response to the SOR and at his hearing, Applicant
 Department Counsel’s list of exhibits is included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.3
2
established that he filed his federal returns for 2012 and 2013 in March 2016, around
the time he responded to the SOR. However, it was also determined at the hearing that
Applicant did not submit his 2014 federal returns until July 2016. He has not yet filed his
federal return for 2015, and he has not filed his state income tax returns for the 2012 -
2015 tax years. As of May 2016, the IRS advised Applicant that he owed $12,208 for
the 2012 tax year, and $7,665 for the 2013 tax year. Applicant started working with a tax
resolution law firm a few weeks before his hearing, but did not submit any information
showing that he has made any payments on his tax debts. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A;
Tr. 15, 37 - 42, 64 - 73, 84 - 87)
As a result of his 18-month unemployment in 2009 and 2010, Applicant also
incurred high balances on credit cards he used to help make ends meet. He averred
that he has contacted and has been working with some of those creditors but presented
no information to document those efforts. He has not made any progress on other credit
card debts, alleged in SOR 1.d - 1.f. He has been unable to obtain any information
about the debt at SOR 1.d, and he will no longer negotiate with the collection agencies
holding the SOR 1.e and 1.f debts because he feels they are being unreasonable in
their negotiating positions. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Tr. 15, 47 - 50, 59 - 61)
Applicant also incurred three past-due debts for medical services. They are
alleged at SOR 1.g - 1.i. On August 8, 2016, he paid the $25 debt at SOR 1.i. He
disputes the $842 debt at SOR 1.g, claiming that he was billed twice for a single
procedure; however, he did not support his claim with any corroborating documents.
Applicant has no information about the $250 debt at SOR 1.h. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. C;
Tr. 62 - 63)
Applicant feels his current finances are stable, but acknowledged that he is still
repaying a local bank and some associates of his for loans on which he relied when he
was out of work. Applicant’s income fell by about $20,000 when he was hired by his
current employer. In May 2015, his current wife became disabled and unable to work,
thus reducing their household monthly income by about $2,000. However, Applicant’s
annual salary has now increased to about $90,000. (Answer; Tr. 52 - 53, 65, 85)
As of August 2016, Applicant still owed $24,000 on loans totaling $137,000
borrowed since 2004. The vice-president of that bank holds Applicant in high regard for
his strength of character and financial responsibility. Other references speak positively
of Applicant for his loyalty, work ethic, and dependability. He also is active in his church
and has a reputation for honesty and discretion in his community. (Ax. D)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
 See Directive. 6.3.4
3
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations); and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). As alleged in SOR 1.c - 1.i,
Applicant incurred significant past-due or delinquent debt, in large part, because of an
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
18-month period of unemployment. As alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b, he also did not file
his federal or state income tax returns as required for tax years 2012 and 2013.
I have considered the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions as potentially
applicable to these facts and circumstances:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
    
Of these mitigating conditions, only AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are supported by the
record. AG ¶ 20(b) is only partially applicable. Applicant’s financial problems arose from
a lengthy period of unemployment and a failed housing market. Although he was able to
satisfy his mortgage obligation in 2011, he has not provided information that reflects a
responsible effort to resolve any of the debts alleged at SOR 1.d - 1.i. His claimed
disputes of SOR 1.d and 1.g are not substantiated. AG ¶ 20(d) applies only to
Applicant’s resolution of the mortgage-related debt at SOR 1.c in 2011. The only other
debt he has resolved is the $25 SOR 1.i debt, which he paid two days before his
hearing. The credit card and medical debts alleged at SOR 1.d - 1.h have not been paid
or otherwise resolved because of undocumented disputes with creditors or because
Applicant has chosen to not negotiate with some creditors.
As to SOR 1.a and 1.b, none of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions apply.
Applicant presented information showing that he filed his federal returns for 2012 and
2013, but did so only around the time he responded to the SOR. He has not yet filed
any state tax returns since the 2011 tax year, and the information he presented shows
he submitted his federal return for the 2014 tax year in July 2016, and he has not yet
filed his federal return for the 2015 tax year. Further, Applicant owes nearly $20,000 in
unpaid taxes for 2012 and 2013. Applicant sought the  assistance of a tax resolution law
firm, but did so just before his hearing and has not yet established a plan for resolving
his unfiled returns or satisfying his tax debts. 
In summary, despite being gainfully employed since August 2013, Applicant still
has not satisfactorily explained why he has not paid several debts that appear to be
within his ability to do so. Also, he is in debt to the federal government for unpaid taxes
and he owes his local bank another $24,000. These facts undermine confidence that
Applicant is likely to resolve his financial difficulties in the foreseeable future. On
balance, Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the
Government’s information.
5
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a Navy veteran and long-time defense contractor employee.
He has held a security clearance for most of his adult life, and he is held in high regard
by his friends and associates. Nonetheless, this information is not sufficient to overcome
the recent security concerns raised by his tax status and by his failure to act on his
remaining debts. Available information leaves me with doubts about his current
suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest
is the principal focus in these adjudications, any unresolved doubts must be resolved
against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.c and 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
6
