 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-07580 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s most recent arrest involving his excessive alcohol consumption was in 
November 2008. He reduced his alcohol consumption, and he drinks alcohol responsibly. 
His 2016 credit reports indicate he has a good credit score, and he has numerous entries 
showing debts paid or paying as agreed. Alcohol consumption and financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. From 1996 to May 2014, Applicant 
committed six misdemeanor-level criminal offenses. His driver’s license will be restricted 
until 2018. Criminal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified 
information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On February 11, 2015, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application 
(SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On May 6, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
 
2 
                                         
 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct), G (alcohol consumption), and F (financial considerations).  
 
On June 15, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 31, 2016, the case was assigned 
to me. On November 17, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for December 6, 2016. (HE 1) Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered six exhibits; Applicant offered 
nine exhibits; and all exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript 
(Tr.) 17-22; GE 1-6; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-I) On December 14, 2016, DOHA received 
a copy of the transcript of the hearing.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 
1.e, 2.a, 2.b, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
a manager for teams installing wireless communications. (Tr. 6, 10; GE 1) In 1986, 
Applicant graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) In 1990, he received a bachelor’s degree in 
economics with a minor in marketing, and in 1992, he received a master’s degree in 
marketing education. (Tr. 7-8)  
 
 In 2001, Applicant married, and in 2002, his spouse passed away. (Tr. 8) In 2006, 
he married, and in 2007, he divorced. (Tr. 9) He has an 18-year-old son, and his child 
support of $200 monthly is current. (Tr. 9) He never served in the U.S. military. (Tr. 8) 
There is no evidence of security violations.  
 
Criminal Conduct and Alcohol Consumption 
 
In 1996, Applicant drank six to eight beers over a three-hour period, and then he 
drove his vehicle. (Tr. 38-39) He was arrested for and convicted of driving with an 
excessive blood alcohol content (BAC).1 (Tr. 35-37) He refused the police offer that he 
                                            
1Applicant’s SOR does not allege the following offenses: (1) in 1996, Applicant was convicted of 
driving with an excessive blood alcohol content; (2) in February 2010, Applicant was convicted of driving 
with a suspended or revoked driver’s license; and in March 2016, Applicant was in a vehicle accident, and 
he violated his limited driver’s permit. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal 
Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
 
3 
                                         
 
take a test to determine his BAC. (Tr. 36, 38) He was required to attend an Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meeting. (Tr. 37)  
 
In September 1998, Applicant consumed eight or nine drinks, and then he drove a 
boat. (Tr. 40) The police stopped him, and he refused a BAC test. (Tr. 41) He was arrested 
and charged with operating a vessel while intoxicated. (SOR ¶ 1.a response) He was 
convicted and received two years of suspended imposition of sentence or probation. (Tr. 
41) 
 
In March 2007, Applicant drank “too much” alcohol, and then he drove his vehicle. 
(Tr. 43) The police arrested Applicant for driving while intoxicated by alcohol (DWI). (Tr. 
43; SOR ¶ 1.b response) Applicant said he was unemployed from March 2007 to 
November 2008. (Tr. 23) He was going through a divorce in 2007, and he was depressed. 
(Tr. 23) In December 2007, Applicant pleaded guilty to DWI, and he received two years 
of probation and a $300 fine. (Tr. 43; AE A) Applicant completed a 40-hour alcohol-
counseling course, and he successfully completed probation. (Tr. 24, 52; AE A)    
 
In November 2008, Applicant consumed an excessive amount of alcohol; he was 
intoxicated; and then he drove his vehicle. (Tr. 47-48, 60) The police arrested him for 
driving while his license was suspended or revoked and for DWI. (Tr. 45-48, 50; SOR ¶ 
1.c allegation; GE 2; AE B) In August 2008, he was convicted of DWI, and he received 
two years of probation. (GE 3 at 5) He was prohibited from drinking alcohol while on 
probation. (Tr. 45) His license was revoked for 10 years. (Tr. 49, 51) He also received a 
$250 fine, community service, and alcohol-related counseling. In 2014, he received a 
restricted driver’s license. (Tr. 51-52) He did not attend any non-court-ordered AA 
meetings. (Tr. 52) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant was charged with DWI in December 2008. In his 
SOR response, Applicant admitted this offense. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
record indicates in December 2008, Applicant was arrested in connection with a DWI; 
however, there is no offense date listed or disposition information. (GE 3 at 5-6) Applicant 
denied that he was arrested for DWI in December 2008. (Tr. 24-25, 49) The Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) report of investigation (ROI) reiterates that Applicant was 
arrested in December 2008 for DWI; however, the only cited basis was the FBI record. 
(GE 4) The OPM indicated the FBI report did not include any disposition information. (GE 
4) There are no court records indicating disposition of the December 2008 DWI. Applicant 
refuted the allegation that he was arrested for DWI in December 2008. 
 
In 2009, the police arrested Applicant for driving with a suspended or revoked 
driver’s license, and in February 2010, Applicant was convicted of driving with a 
suspended or revoked driver’s license. (Tr. 53-54; GE 4 at 4) He received a fine. (Tr. 55) 
                                            
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). Applicant’s non-SOR conduct will not be considered for disqualification purposes, and 
consideration will be limited to the five circumstances outlined by the Appeal Board.  
 
4 
                                         
 
Because he did not have a driver’s license, he was not required to have an interlock 
device on his vehicle. (Tr. 55)  
 
In May 2014, Applicant was charged with unauthorized introduction of alcoholic 
beverages on Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) property. (SOR ¶ 1.e response) 
Applicant had an interlock device on his vehicle. He had an open container of alcohol in 
his vehicle that was not in the trunk. (Tr. 26, 55; GE 4) He did not put the bottle in the 
trunk because his vehicle was a hatch back. (Tr. 56) Applicant paid a $525 fine. (Tr. 27)   
 
In March 2016, Applicant was in a vehicle accident, and he received two points 
which was for violating his limited driver’s permit. (Tr. 51) He struck the back of another 
vehicle, and he received a ticket for following too closely. (Tr. 61) 
 
Applicant said he has reduced his alcohol consumption to a drink or two. (Tr. 27) 
He does not consume alcohol during the work week. (Tr. 28) He has alcohol in his home. 
(Tr. 58) Around November 2016, he drank five or six drinks while cooking. (Tr. 59) He 
takes his employment very seriously, and he is dedicated to his work. (Tr. 27-29) He 
currently has an interlock device on his vehicle and a restricted driver’s license. (Tr. 56, 
61) When he is on temporary duty (TDY), he drives to his hotel from the airport even 
though that vehicle use is not specifically listed on his driving permit. (Tr. 61-62) When he 
uses a rental car while TDY, he is operating a vehicle without an interlock device. (Tr. 62) 
He has never received a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. (Tr. 62) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In 2014, Applicant had an account for $1,456 placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 3.a 
response; GE 6 at 4) He believes he paid this debt. (Tr. 64) He did not provide 
corroborating documentation that he paid this debt. 
 
In 2009, Applicant had an account for $2,632 placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 3.b 
response) This is a timeshare resort debt; he said he paid $100 to $120 monthly for three 
to four years; and he “paid off the initial $4,000 for it.” (Tr. 30, 65) He informed the resort 
that he was “cutting ties” with the resort. (Tr. 66) He said the resort added $2,600 in 
maintenance fees. (Tr. 31) Applicant has never used the resort. (Tr. 31) He did not want 
the resort membership, and the debt has dropped off of his credit report. (Tr. 31, 66) He 
has not made any payments since about 2010. (Tr. 65) 
 
In 2013, Applicant had an account for $2,158 placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 3.c 
response; GE 6 at 9) Applicant disputes his responsibility for this debt. Applicant received 
a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine for treating his sleep apnea while 
he had medical insurance. (Tr. 31) When he lost his employment and medical insurance, 
he attempted to return the CPAP machine to the CPAP company. (Tr. 31, 67) However, 
the CPAP company never retrieved their CPAP machine. (Tr. 31, 67) Applicant continues 
to be willing to return the CPAP machine to the CPAP company. (Tr. 31) He is not using 
the CPAP machine. (Tr. 67) 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
The three 2016 credit reports of record do not show any of the three delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. (GE 5; AE C; AE E) Applicant has good credit scores (all above 
725). (AE C; AE E) His credit reports list numerous positive entries showing accounts are 
current or paid. Applicant’s annual income is $52,000. (Tr. 63) He assures he intends to 
pay his debts, and he understands the financial conduct required to retain his security 
clearance. He does not have a written budget. (Tr. 64) He has not had financial 
counseling. (Tr. 64) He has excellent performance evaluations. (AE F-AE H) Applicant’s 
supervisor described Applicant as detail oriented, respected by his customers, and 
proactive to minimize the adverse impact of issues. (AE I) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
 
6 
                                         
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  Three alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) through 22(c) provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(d) through 22(g) do not apply. There was no evidence of: alcohol 
impairment or intoxication at work; an alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, or alcohol use 
disorder diagnosis; and failure to follow any court orders concerning alcohol use.  
 
 
7 
                                         
 
AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), and 22(c) apply. Applicant committed DWIs in March 2007 and 
November 2008. In 1998, he operated a boat while intoxicated, and in May 2014, he had 
an open container of alcohol in his vehicle while he was at work at a VA property. He 
engaged in binge alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired judgment.2    
  
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and 
is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
                                            
2The term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines.
 
“Binge drinking is the most 
common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United States. See the Center for Disease Control website, 
(stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines binge drinking as a pattern of 
drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This 
typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and when women consume 4 or more drinks, in 
about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-drinking.htm.  
 
8 
                                         
 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) applies. There is no evidence of irresponsible alcohol consumption 
after Applicant’s DWI arrest in November 2008. His possession of an open container of 
alcohol at work in 2014 in his vehicle does not establish irresponsible alcohol 
consumption.  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a fairly 
lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 
3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).     
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption. He has a sustained period 
of responsible alcohol consumption. He has not had any alcohol consumption related 
incidents involving the police, courts, or at his employment since November 2008.  
Applicant has eliminated doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment in relation to his alcohol consumption. Alcohol consumption security concerns 
are mitigated.   
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and “(c) 
allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”   
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. The SOR alleges and the record establishes 
Applicant committed four misdemeanor-level offenses: (1) in 1998, he operated a boat 
while intoxicated; (2) in March 2007, DWI; (3) in November 2008, DWI; and (4) in May 
2014, unauthorized introduction of alcoholic beverages on VA property.  
 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Although none of the mitigating conditions fully apply, there are important 
mitigating factors. Applicant has reduced his alcohol consumption, and he does not drive 
after consuming alcohol. He has an excellent employment record. He expressed regret 
and remorse concerning his offenses.   
 
Applicant admitted the four criminal offenses in the SOR. He committed two 
additional criminal offenses. In 1996, Applicant was convicted of driving with an excessive 
BAC. In February 2010, Applicant was convicted of driving with a suspended or revoked 
driver’s license. Applicant is not in in full compliance with the conditions of his restricted 
driver’s license. When he is TDY, he does not install an interlock device on his rental 
vehicle, and he drives a rental vehicle from the airport to his hotel (not to and from his 
home to work). Although he is not on probation, restrictions on his driver’s license will 
continue until 2018. More time must elapse without violations of his license restrictions 
and without criminal activity before there is enough assurance that criminal conduct 
security concerns are unlikely to recur. Applicant is not ready to be entrusted with access 
to classified information at this time.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
10 
                                         
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
11 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s SOR indicates he has three delinquent debts in collections for $1,456, 
$2,632, and $2,158. He paid the first debt. For the $2,632 debt, he terminated the contract 
for the CPAP and offered to return the CPAP machine. For the $2,158 debt, he terminated 
the time-share agreement. The creditors for the $2,632 and $2,158 debts have not 
pursued additional payments from Applicant, and the two debts are not listed on his 2016 
credit reports.  
 
Applicant has good credit scores (all above 725). His credit reports show numerous 
positive entries for accounts showing accounts are current or paid. There is sufficient 
assurance that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur in the future. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are established. Applicant mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G, J, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
a manager for teams installing wireless communications. In 1990, he received a 
bachelor’s degree in economics with a minor in marketing, and in 1992, he received a 
                                            
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
12 
                                         
 
master’s degree in marketing education. He has excellent performance evaluations from 
his employer. His supervisor described Applicant as detail oriented, respected by his 
customers, and proactive to minimize the adverse impact of issues. There is no evidence 
of security violations.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges three debts in collections totaling $6,246. He paid one 
debt, and he disputes his responsibility for a time-share vacation debt and a medical debt 
for a CPAP machine. The three 2016 credit reports of record do not show any of the three 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant has good credit scores (all above 725). 
His credit reports show numerous positive entries for accounts showing accounts are 
current or paid. He assures he intends to pay his debts, and he understands the financial 
conduct required to retain his security clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
  
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt repayment, 
and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
Applicant has not been diagnosed with alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, or 
alcohol use disorder. He has reduced his alcohol consumption. He has not had an incident 
involving the police or the courts and excessive alcohol consumption since November 
2008. He does not drive after drinking alcohol. His current alcohol consumption is 
responsible. 
 
The factors weighing against continuation of his security clearance are more 
substantial than the mitigating circumstances. From 1996 to May 2014, Applicant 
committed six misdemeanor-level criminal offenses. In addition to the six offenses, in 
March 2016, Applicant was in a vehicle accident, and he violated his limited driver’s 
permit. When on TDY, he uses a rental car to go to his hotel, and he does not use an 
alcohol-interlock device on his rental car. His driver’s license will be restricted until 2018.  
 
13 
                                         
 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). 
Unmitigated criminal conduct security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a 
security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform 
necessary for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior 
consistent with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence 
of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Alcohol 
consumption and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated; however, 
criminal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
