 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07687 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F, financial considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 1, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
 
December 20, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 25, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through E. All exhibits were admitted without objection.1 DOHA received 
the hearing transcript on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and 1.g. He denied SOR ¶ 1.f and 
did not admit or deny ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. His failure to respond to those two allegations will 
be construed as a denial of the allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He earned some college credits, but does not have a 
degree. He was married from 1991 to 1998, and has two children, ages 24 and 23, from 
the marriage. He has a 12-year-old child from a previous relationship. Applicant served 
four years in the Marine Corps and received an honorable discharge. He has worked at 
his current job since May 2012.2  
 
 In 2005, Applicant and his former girlfriend purchased a house for approximately 
$210,000. She was working at the time. Applicant withdrew $50,000 from his 401k 
retirement account for the purchase. He paid the taxes owed on the withdrawal. In 
2007, he obtained a second mortgage on the home for $30,000 (SOR ¶ 1.e). In 
approximately 2008 and 2009, he took two loans from his 401k retirement account. He 
could not remember the amounts of the loans. He used the money to remodel the 
home. He also purchased an $8,500 engagement ring, a four-wheeler recreational 
vehicle, and a new vehicle.3  
 
Applicant’s girlfriend lost her job in 2008. Applicant was able to continue to pay 
the bills. He worked for a government contractor from 1987 until he was laid-off due to a 
reduction-in-force in October 2009. He received severance pay, which was about 
$19,000 after taxes. He is entitled to a pension, but it is held in escrow until he retires. 
He was unable to repay his 401k loans, due to his unemployment, and was required to 
pay taxes on the amounts. He had some savings that he used to support his girlfriend 
and their son. He was also paying child support for his other two children. He moved his 
family to another state, where his father lived, so they could live with him. In June 2010, 
he then moved to a different state hoping to get a job, but was unsuccessful. He worked 
odd jobs and received unemployment benefits. Due to the country’s economic crisis, he 
had difficulty finding work. He was aware of his delinquent debts, but did not have the 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is Department Counsel’s exhibit list. HE II is the discovery letter. 
 
2 Tr. 16-19. 
 
3 Tr. 35-40. 
 
 
3 
 
 
means to pay them. A June 2015 credit report and Applicant’s admissions substantiate 
the debts.4 
 
Applicant testified that he contacted the IRS in 2010 and told it that he was 
unemployed, and he would pay his tax debt when he was able. In May 2011, Applicant 
attempted to resolve some of his tax problems and contacted Tax Masters. He paid 
$1,500 for its services. It went bankrupt, and he was not reimbursed.5  
 
In May 2012, Applicant was rehired by his long-term employer. He had child 
support arrearages that he paid. He was no longer cohabitating with his girlfriend, and 
he had child support obligations for their son.6  
 
In 2014, Applicant’s father passed away, and in July money from his father’s trust 
was released. Applicant inherited approximately $100,000 in various stocks and bonds. 
He sold some and used the proceeds to purchase a new vehicle for $20,000. He 
explained he purchased the vehicle so he could reestablish his credit and having a new 
car loan is better to accomplish this. He was aware he had a federal tax lien at the time. 
He testified he began to pay some of his delinquent debts, but was not specific.7  
 
A federal tax lien was entered against Applicant in 2012 in the approximate 
amount of $13,814 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant testified that this debt is from 2009 and 2010 
for the taxes owed on his 401k loans. He has not resolved this lien. He explained that 
he takes zero exemptions for his federal tax withholdings so that any refund he is owed 
will be applied to his tax debt. He has made a conscious decision to have whatever tax 
refund he is entitled to, be applied to his tax debt. He does not intend to use the money 
he inherited to pay his tax debt at this time because he wants to set up a trust for his 
children and leave them an inheritance when he dies. If his tax refund does not pay the 
balance owed to the IRS, he testified he will then use his inheritance to pay it. Applicant 
provided a copy of check to the IRS dated June 2016 for $8,378 to be applied toward 
his 2009 delinquent taxes. He does not know what the current balance he owes on this 
tax lien.8 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,842) and 1.c ($1,531) are for state tax liens entered 
in 2011. Applicant testified that the debts are attributed to his 401k loans, severance 
pay, and additional income from working overseas. He was required to pay taxes on this 
income. He testified he decided not to pay the tax because he was unemployed and 
                                                          
4 Tr. 30-35, 40-44; GE 2, 3.  
 
5 Tr. 48, 52. 
 
6 Tr. 44. 
 
7 Tr. 45-47, 59-60. 
 
8 Tr. 48-58; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
needed the money. Applicant paid the state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.c in October 2016.9 The 
other state tax lien remains delinquent. He testified that he intends for this tax lien to be 
satisfied after he files his 2016 state income tax returns and has his refund applied to 
the debt. If the refund does not cover the lien, then he will pay the amount owed.10  
 
When Applicant’s girlfriend lost her job in 2008, they were able to get a loan 
modification for the mortgage on their house. It was modified from a monthly payment of 
approximately $1,100 to $800. When Applicant lost his job he could no longer pay the 
mortgage. The house was foreclosed and sold. He testified he was notified that he 
owed $155,000. He has not contacted the creditor and does not know the status of the 
debt. He did not know if he received an IRS 1099c form.11 
 
The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.d ($26,983) is for a credit card. Applicant and his 
girlfriend used the card and were unable to pay it after he lost his job. During a 
background interview with a government investigator in July 2015, Applicant told the 
investigator that he received calls and letters from a collection company regarding the 
debt. He told the investigator he would contact the creditor and attempt to settle the 
debt if he could afford it. Since going back to work in May 2012, he has not made an 
attempt to contact the creditor or repay the debt.12  
 
Applicant has not contacted the creditor for the charged-off second mortgage in 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($31,118). He testified he does not anticipate paying this debt. Applicant said 
he does not know what the charged-off debt is for in SOR ¶ 1.f ($515). During his 
background interview, he told the investigator that he would research the debt and 
dispute it or resolve it within three months.13 He testified that he had no way to contact 
the creditor. It was brought to his attention that a credit report he was provided as part 
of discovery contained the creditor’s address.14 He testified the debt is no longer on his 
credit report. The debt was charged-off in February 2009.15  
 
Applicant provided a copy of financial statement prepared by a financial 
counselor. The statement lists all of his expenses and his past due and delinquent 
debts. It shows his debt balance is $242,070 and his past-due or delinquent debt 
balance is $183,891. The financial statement does not include Applicant’s inheritance.16 
                                                          
9 AE A, C. 
 
10 Tr. 62-64, 66-67. 
 
11 Tr. 64-66, 77-78. 
 
12 Tr. 67-74; GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. 74-77; GE 3.  
 
14 GE 2. 
 
15 Tr. 67-74; GE 2; AE D. 
 
16 Tr. 70-72; AE E. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant disclosed on his security clearance application (SCA) that he owed 
delinquent child support. He failed to disclose any of his other delinquent debts or tax 
liens, as required. During Applicant’s interview with a government investigator in July 
2015, he disclosed that his home mortgage was foreclosed when he lost his job. He 
advised the investigator that he assumed the balance owed on the mortgage was 
excused. He advised the investigator that he did not have any other debts he thought 
needed to be listed or discussed. He was then confronted with his federal and state tax 
liens and other delinquent debts. He told the investigator that the reason he failed to 
disclose his federal tax lien was because he planned to dispute it and did not agree with 
the debt. He felt he could win the dispute because he borrowed money for home 
improvements and then lost his job; so his basis for a dispute was financial hardship. 
The reason he failed to disclose his state tax liens was because he was unaware of 
them and had no prior notice of them. The reason he did not disclose the judgment 
(SOR ¶1.d) and credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.e) was because he either forgot to list them 
due to oversight or he tried to list them and then forgot to hit save on the computer, but 
he could not recall specifically. He indicated he did not intentionally fail to disclose his 
delinquent debts.17  
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified that the reason he failed to disclose any of his 
other debts was due to problems with the SCA computer program. He stated he 
attempted to disclose information and the computer program would not accept his 
information. He did this multiple times and the SCA was rejected. He called the help 
desk and was told to delete certain entries. He was in a hurry to get the application 
completed. He testified that he deleted entries as advised and submitted the SCA. He 
could not recall which specific entries he deleted. He testified that because he felt he 
had a legitimate hardship for not paying his federal tax lien and was going to hire an 
attorney to resolve it, he decided not to disclose the information. He did not put 
explanations about his difficulties with the computer program in the SCA comment 
section for financial inquiries or the general comment section. He was able to provide 
explanations about his child support arrearages in the SCA. He did not tell the 
government investigator that he was unable to disclose his delinquent debts due to a 
problem with the computer program.18  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
17 Tr. 79-90. 
 
18 Tr. 79-90; GE 3. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.19 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts and taxes that began to accumulate in 2008 and 
he is unwilling or unable to resolve. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
                                                          
19 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant has delinquent debts that are ongoing, unresolved, and include federal 
and state tax liens. He does not anticipate paying the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. He 
is unsure about the status of his foreclosed mortgage. His failure to address and resolve 
them casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a lengthy period unemployment 
from October 2009 to May 2012. This was a condition beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstance. Applicant has been employed full time for more than four and a half 
years. In 2014, he received an inheritance of approximately $100,000. He recently paid 
a state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.c) and made a payment toward a federal tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a). 
Applicant does not intend to pay the balance of his federal tax lien, but prefers to wait 
for any refund on his future tax return be applied to the delinquent lien. He has not 
made payments to resolve a large credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.d), and he does not 
“anticipate” paying the second mortgage debt (SOR ¶ 1.e). He does not want to use 
resources he inherited to pay his debts because he wants to leave his children an 
inheritance when he dies. AG ¶ 20(b) has some application because his financial 
problems began due to unemployment. However, Applicant has failed to act responsibly 
in resolving his just debts. 
 
 There is some evidence Applicant received financial counseling by having a 
financial statement completed for him, but there is no indication that his delinquent 
debts and tax liens are under control. Applicant does not intend to pay some of his 
legitimate delinquent debts. Since 2014, he has had the resources to resolve his tax 
debts, but has chosen to delay doing so based on a prospective refund. He does not 
intend or “anticipate” paying other delinquent debts. Only the first part of AG ¶ 20(c) 
applies. 
 
 Applicant resolved a 2011 state tax lien in June 2016. He had been employed 
since May 2012. He made a payment in June 2016 toward a federal tax lien entered in 
2012 for delinquent taxes from 2009 or 2010. He has not addressed any of his other 
delinquent debts. He has not researched the current status of his foreclosed mortgage, 
which may not be owed. Applicant has not initiated good-faith efforts to repay his other 
delinquent debts. It is understandable that after Applicant returned to his job, it would 
take him some time to get his finances in order. That time has expired. He received an 
inheritance in 2014 and does not intend to use it to pay his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to his resolution of one state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.c).  
 
 Applicant advised the government investigator that he would research the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.f ($515) and dispute it. He did not. He disputed the debt at his hearing. It is no 
 
9 
 
 
longer on the credit report he provided, but it is on the combined credit report provided 
by the government. This debt is unresolved. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
I find that Applicant was aware he had delinquent debts and was aware he had 
not paid the taxes owed for his 401k loan. Despite his assertion that he was going to 
hire an attorney and dispute the tax lien, he deliberately chose not to disclose it as 
required. At his hearing, he confirmed he did not disclose his federal tax lien because 
he was going to dispute it. He indicated to the investigator that he either forgot about the 
other debts or did not save them to the computer when he completed his SCA. At his 
hearing, he stated he did not disclose his other delinquent debts due to computer 
problems. He did not tell the investigator that he had computer problems. I did not find 
Applicant’s testimony credible. I find he deliberately failed to disclose tax liens and 
delinquent debts. The above disqualifying condition applies.   
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused by or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
 
10 
 
 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant made a conscious decision not to disclose his federal tax lien on his 
SCA. His explanation that he wanted to dispute them does not negate his responsibility 
to disclose the information. He claimed he was unaware of his state tax liens because 
he did not receive notice, but attributed them to his failure to repay his 401k loans, 
severance pay, and increased income from overseas employment. He disclosed he had 
child support arrearages and an explanation in the SCA. He failed to do this with other 
delinquent debts. Although he attributed his failure to disclose any of his other debts 
due to computer problems, I did not find his testimony credible. He did not disclose his 
debts to the government investigator until they were brought to his attention. His 
explanation to the investigator was either he forgot to disclose them on the SCA or he 
forgot to save them on the computer program. I have considered the applicability AG ¶ 
17(b) under the facts of this case and conclude it does not apply. Applicant was aware 
of his federal tax lien and consciously decided not to disclose it despite a specific 
question about tax debts. Even if he were advised by a computer support personnel to 
delete entries on his SCA, it does not absolve him of his responsibility to disclose to an 
authorized official that he was unable to provide accurate information. He did not do this 
after completion of the SCA, and he did not do this when he was interviewed by a 
government investigator. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant’s conduct was not minor 
and did not happen under unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His conduct 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He served four years in the military. He worked for his 
employer for 25 years and was laid off when the economy was in a downturn. He had 
loans from his 401K that he was unable to pay, and which resulted in a federal tax lien. 
He concluded his state tax liens were also the result of those circumstances. He 
defaulted on a second mortgage and large credit card debt. Applicant was rehired by his 
employer in May 2012. He received an inheritance of approximately $100,000 in 2014. 
He recently made a payment toward his federal tax lien, but the balance owed is 
unknown. He resolved one state tax lien. He is not paying the balances owed on his tax 
debts because he intends to have any future refunds applied to the debt. He has not 
addressed his other delinquent debts. He purchased a new car. He decided not to use 
the money he has on hand to pay his tax debts or his other debts because he wants to 
leave his children an inheritance. Applicant cannot be relied upon to follow rules and 
regulations. Instead of complying with them, he adjusts them for his benefit. He has 
ignored his financial obligations and commitments despite having the resources at this 
time to make progress toward resolving them. Applicant’s conduct raises questions 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concern arising under the financial considerations guideline and the personal 
conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
