KEYWORD:  Guideline F
DIGEST:  Applicant was not denied adequate notice of the procedural rules employed at his
hearing or of his rights at the hearing, nor was he otherwise denied the due process afforded by
the Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO:  15-04472.a1
DATE:  02/09/2017
DATE:  February 9, 2017
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-04472
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 12, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant  requested a hearing. 
On November 17, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor in a job he has held since 2014.  He served in the
military from 2005 until 2014, after which he experienced unemployment until he found his current
position.  Applicant held a clearance while on active duty, which was renewed in 2010.  He was
forward deployed during much of his military service.  In 2008, when preparing for an upcoming
deployment, he attempted to suspend cell phone service.  This effort was not successful, and
Applicant became liable for unpaid bills.  A similar circumstance occurred again in 2012.  Applicant
is engaged to be married and has a child from a previous relationship.  He pays between $300 and
$500 a month in support.
 During his last year in the military, Applicant injured his back while performing physical
training.  He is seeking an increase in his disability rating, which could increase his monthly
payments and result in over $24,000 in retroactive benefits.  He will use this money for debt
payments.  His SOR lists several delinquent debts, for such things as a delinquent mortgage, which
has gone into foreclosure and constitutes 90% of the amount of debt alleged.  Applicant had used
his VA eligibility to buy a house, planning on the contributions of a roommate to enable him to
make his payments.  However, the roommate left in 2011, and Applicant’s last payment was in
February of that year.  The foreclosure sale was pending as of the close of the record.  Applicant
presented no evidence as to what he had done to resolve the mortgage. His delinquent debts also
include the cell phone accounts described above, television services, and various other charged-off
and/or collection accounts.
During his clearance interview Applicant told the investigator that he intended to seek
financial counseling in order to resolve his past-due obligations.  As of the hearing he had met once
with a counselor but had not established a plan for paying his debts, none of which were resolved
as of the close of the record.  Applicant is meeting his monthly expenses and is living within his
means.  He files his tax returns as required, his most recent refund being used for child support.  He
states that he has little money left over each month after expenses.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that none of Applicant’s debts were resolved.  He provided no
documentation to support his claim that he did not owe the two cell phone accounts described above. 
Moreover, the largest debt, the mortgage, is due to Applicant’s own poor judgment.  He stated that
Applicant did not present information about how he intends to manage his money in the future, and
he did not show how he plans to resolve his delinquent debts.  The Judge concluded that Applicant
had not mitigated the concerns raised by his delinquent debts.
Discussion
Applicant has raised an issue of due process.  He notes that he represented himself at the
hearing.  Although he received pre-hearing guidance, he states that he found the guidance difficult
to comprehend.  He states that he could not afford an attorney, with the result that he did not
understand what kind of evidence he should present.  He states that he thought the Government
would submit an updated credit report, which would show that several of his debts had been resolved
or had dropped off the report.  Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly explain the burden
of proof or the procedures that would be followed.  
As Applicant acknowledges, he received written guidance prior to the hearing.  This
guidance was prepared by the Chief Administrative Judge and advised Applicant of his right to hire
counsel or enlist the services of some other representative.  It also explained in some detail the
procedures that would be followed at the hearing–opening and closing statements, evidentiary rules,
the order of presentation of evidence, examination of witnesses, objections, etc.  In addition to the
Chief Judge’s guidance, Department Counsel provided Applicant with a separate memorandum that
explained his rights, including the right to representation, to present evidence, to object to evidence,
etc.  This memo also listed the documents that Department Counsel intended to present at the
hearing, and that he in fact did present.  The cover letter accompanying the SOR provided similar
guidance, along with a copy of the Directive, which establishes the rights an applicant enjoys at a
DOHA proceeding and describes the respective evidentiary burdens of the parties.  See Directive
¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15.  At the beginning of the hearing, the Judge advised Applicant that he would not
hold Applicant to the standards expected of an attorney.  Tr. at 8.  He inquired if Applicant received
written pre-hearing guidance and if he had any questions.  Applicant replied that he did not have any
questions “currently.”  Tr. at 8.  When, at the beginning of his presentation, he expressed uncertainty
as to the best way to proceed, the Judge assisted him, suggesting that he go down each allegation
in the SOR and discuss it.  Tr. at 22-23.  
Applicant cites to no evidence that he could have presented that would likely have affected
the outcome of the case.1  He points to nothing in the record that would have led him to think that
Department Counsel was going to present a later credit report or anything other than what he had
advised Applicant he was going to offer.2  If Applicant had believed that additional evidence would
have helped him, he had an opportunity to submit it as part of his case-in-chief.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.15, supra, to the effect that it is an applicant’s task to present evidence in mitigation.  Applicant
was not denied adequate notice of the procedural rules employed at his hearing or of his rights at the
hearing, nor was he otherwise denied the due process afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-03929 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 20, 2015).
Applicant cites to evidence of his expected increase in VA payments, the loss of a roommate
resulting in his mortgage delinquency, etc.  The Judge made findings about this evidence, and his
analysis took these findings into account.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
1Applicant said nothing at the hearing that should have alerted the Judge that he had other evidence that he
wanted to submit.  “[Judge]: All right, no other documents in support of your case? [Applicant]: No other documents. 
No, Your Honor. [Judge]: Is there anything that you had intended to bring here today that you either forgot, or just now
realized that you should have brought? [Applicant]: Not that I can think of, right now, Your Honor.”  Tr. at 21.  
2In any event, that a debt no longer appears on a credit report does not establish meaningful evidence as to the
circumstances of debt’s disposition.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015).  
considered all of the evidence in the record. Neither has he shown that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-03929, supra. at 2-3.  Despite Applicant’s argument to the contrary, we conclude that the Judge’s
whole-person analysis satisfied the requirements of Directive ¶ 6.3, in that he considered the totality
of the evidence in formulating his conclusions.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05762 at 3 (App. Bd.
Dec. 15, 2016).  Applicant cites to a Hearing Office case that he believes supports his effort to obtain
a favorable result.  We give this case due consideration as persuasive authority.  However, Hearing
Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  Id.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.      
Signed:  Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed:  James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed:  James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
