 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07464 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and criminal conduct trustworthiness 
concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was 
taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 25, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 20, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 26, 2017. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
Applicant testified and submitted Appellant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 23 years old. He attended college from 2011 to 2013, but has not 
earned a degree. He is not married and has no children. He has worked for his present 
employer, a government contractor, since November 2014.1  
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 2010 until August 2014 when he was between the 
ages of 17 and 20. While attending college in February 2012, he was arrested and 
charged with possession of less than an ounce of marijuana. A small amount was found 
in his dorm room where his friends were smoking it. He was not present at the time, but 
because it was in his room, he was arrested. He completed a pretrial diversion program 
and performed community service. The charge was dismissed. His friend admitted to 
the college dean that the marijuana did not belong to Applicant, so Applicant was 
permitted to remain in school.2  
 
 In November 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of less 
than an ounce of marijuana. He was stopped at a traffic checkpoint and admitted to the 
police officer he had marijuana in his possession. He was placed in a pretrial diversion 
program, fined, ordered to complete community service, and was placed on probation 
for a one year. He also submitted to random drug screenings. All results were negative. 
He completed the terms of the program and the charge was dismissed.3  
 
 In August 2014, Applicant was stopped by the police for not wearing a seat belt. 
He admitted he had marijuana in his possession. He was arrested and charged with 
possession of less than an ounce of marijuana. He was again place in a pretrial 
diversion program, placed on probation for six months, ordered to complete community 
service, submit to random drug screening and to complete a drug evaluation course. He 
completed the terms of the program and the charge was dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant has not used or possessed marijuana since his 2014 arrest. He has 
never used any other illegal drugs. He no longer associates with people who use illegal 
drugs. He understands that the use and possession of marijuana is illegal. He does not 
attend parties or activities where illegal drugs may be present. He credibly testified that 
                                                          
1 Tr. 17-19; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 21-24, 28; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. 24-29; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 29-32; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 
if he were in a place where illegal drugs were present, he would leave the premises. He 
does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. His use of illegal drugs occurred when 
he was young and immature. He has learned from his past choices and their 
consequences.5  
 
 Applicant has been working hard for the past two years and has excelled at his 
job. He provided character letters that describe him as, dependable, responsible, 
honest, courteous, and respectful. He is a team player, who willingly takes on new 
challenges and exercises initiative and a willingness to help others.6  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 20, 32-38. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
4 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the trustworthiness concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse; and 
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 2010 to August 2014. He was arrested three 
times for possession of marijuana from 2012 to 2014. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
 
5 
Applicant admitted using marijuana when he was between 17 and 20 years old. 
He does not socialize any longer with people who use illegal drugs. He has abstained 
from any illegal drugs use since August 2014. He indicated that he would extricate 
himself from a situation if illegal drugs were present. Applicant clearly understands that 
his previous behavior was immature, and he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future. I find Applicant’s two and a half year abstention is an appropriate period and 
future use is unlikely to recur. He fully demonstrated his intention not to abuse drugs in 
the future. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Appellant was arrested and charged three times from 2012 to 2014 with 
possession of marijuana. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
The same analyses under the drug involvement mitigating conditions apply under 
the criminal conduct mitigating conditions. A sufficient period has elapsed since his last 
arrested. Applicant admitted he was immature and is now focused on making 
responsible choices. Applicant provided sufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation, 
such that future criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(b) apply.  
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 23 years old. He was arrested for marijuana possession and 
admitted he used marijuana while in college. He has abstained from marijuana use 
since his last arrest in August 2014. He credibly testified that he has matured and 
understands that his decisions have serious consequences. He does not intend to use 
illegal drugs in the future. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement and criminal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
  
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
