 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03704 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), H (Drug Involvement), and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant refuted the 
allegations under Guideline E, but he has not mitigated the security concerns under 
Guidelines F and H. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 23, 2014. On 
December 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F, H, and E. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The AG are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and 
they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on April 6, 2016, and sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. The FORM included 
Department Counsel’s brief and the SOR (Item 1), Applicant’s SCA (Item 2), credit 
bureau reports (CBRs) from February 2014 and July 2014 (Items 3 and 4), and a 
summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted in August 2014 (Item 5). 
Applicant received the FORM on April 11, 2016, and did not respond.1 The case was 
assigned to me on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.g and 2.a-2.c. He did not answer the Guideline 
E allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.a-3.d, and I have treated his failure to respond as a denial of 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a-3.d. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old warehouseman employed by a federal contractor since 
April 2014. He was employed in the private sector from March 2001 to December 2013, 
when he was fired for drug involvement. He was unemployed from January 2013 to 
February 2014, employed for about a month in 2014, and unemployed for about a 
month before being hired for his current job. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant has never married. He has three adult children. He has lived with a 
cohabitant since May 2000. 
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling about 
$14,256, including a child-support arrearage of about $7,512 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g). It also 
alleges that Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for 
2008, 2011, and 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.g). In his answer to the SOR and in the PSI, Applicant 
admitted all the allegations under this Guideline, except the child-support arrearage, 
which he claimed was being collected by garnishment of his pay. His admissions are 
corroborated by his CBRs. 
 
 Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges that Applicant purchased and used cocaine 
and crack cocaine with varying frequency from September 1984 to November 2013 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). It also alleges that he used marijuana once in June 2014 (SOR ¶ 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to make corrections, additions, deletions, 
and updates to Item 5. He was also informed that he was entitled to object to consideration of Item 5 on 
the ground that it was not authenticated. His failure to respond to the FORM constitutes a waiver of any 
objection to Item 5. See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) (“Although pro se 
applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to 
protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
2.c). In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations under this 
guideline. In the PSI, he told the investigator that he received voluntary inpatient 
treatment for about 60 days in the 1990s for cocaine addiction. He also admitted using 
marijuana on August 17, 2014 (not June 2014, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c), at a 
celebration of his and his brother’s birthdays.  
 
 Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by failing to 
disclose his June 2014 marijuana use (SOR ¶ 3.a), failing to disclose his failures to file 
federal and state income tax returns (SOR ¶ 3.b), failing to disclose his child-support 
arrearage (SOR ¶ 3.c), and failing to disclose any of his delinquent debts (SOR ¶ 3.d). 
In the PSI, Applicant told the investigator that he did not disclose any of the conduct 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h because he did not understand the financial questions in the 
SCA, When confronted with his CBR, he told the investigator that he was unaware of 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e and had forgotten about the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.g. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
 4
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 5
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish three disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”), 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(g): (“failure to 
file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing 
of the same”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. He presented no evidence of conditions largely beyond his control, no 
evidence of counseling, and no evidence a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. His 
payment of the child-support arrearage by garnishment of his pay does not constitute a 
good-faith effort. ISCR Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011), citing ISCR Case 
No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). He has not disputed any of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
 
 6
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s admissions in his SCA and the PSI establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”; and  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(d): satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s drug use 
was frequent and did not occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. The first 
prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement 
was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ 
The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. 
If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 In the PSI, Applicant stated that his last drug use was in August 2014. He did not 
respond to the FORM, when he had an opportunity to update the information about his 
drug use. Even if his last drug was in August 2014, it occurred after his declaration in 
his SCA that he did not intend to use drugs again. He admitted in his PSI that he was 
addicted to cocaine, but there is no evidence of treatment for drug addiction, except for 
 
 7
the 60-day treatment in the 1990s, which was unsuccessful. Although Applicant 
declared his intention to abstain from drugs, he continues to associate with the brother, 
with whom he used drugs. He has not changed his environment, and he has not 
submitted a signed statement agreeing to automatic revocation of his clearance for any 
further drug use. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” Applicant did not answer the allegations of falsification in his 
answer to the SOR, but in the PSI he denied them.  
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of education are relevant 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c that he used marijuana in June 
2014. This allegation apparently was based on his statement in the PSI that he used 
marijuana in August 2014. The SOR and his answer to the SOR were vague regarding 
the specific date of use, but his description of his marijuana use in the PSI was specific 
as to date and was accompanied by a specific description of the event at which it 
occurred. Based on the limited evidence in the record, I am not satisfied that his use of 
marijuana predated his submission of his SCA. Thus, I conclude that the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 3.a is refuted by the PSI.  
 
 Because Applicant has limited education and no experience with federal 
employment or the security clearance process, his explanation in the PSI that he did not 
understand the questions was plausible. When he was interviewed, he volunteered 
derogatory information about his drug involvement and failures to file income tax 
returns, but was unaware of the information in his CBR. It is possible and plausible that 
he believed the collection of the child-support arrearage by garnishment justified a 
 
 8
negative answer to the question about delinquent child-support payments. I conclude 
that the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is not established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F, H, and E in my whole-
person analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, H, 
and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts, drug 
involvement, and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 9
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
