 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05041 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 22, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on six debts, in a total exceeding $20,800. 
Applicant failed to introduce documentation to show that any of his delinquencies have 
been resolved. He failed to file his 2011 Federal income tax return until September 
2016. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On May 31, 2016, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 17, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 21, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted three exhibits (AE) marked AE A through AE C. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE A through AE C, and they were admitted. The record was left open for 
receipt of additional documentation. On September 28, 2016, Applicant submitted seven 
additional exhibits, marked AE D through AE J. Department Counsel had no objections 
to AE D through AE J, and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He has been an employee of a government contractor 
since July 2012. Applicant has never been married, and has one adult son. Applicant is 
currently attending community college. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 25.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on six debts, in a 
total exceeding $20,800. The SOR also alleged he failed to file his 2011 Federal income 
tax return. Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.f, and 1.g. He denied 
subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e. His debts are identified in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to his unemployment from July 
2011 through October 2011, and December 2011 through July 2012. He was terminated 
from his job in July 2011 for tardiness. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 18, 33.) 
 
 Applicant’s debts include: a judgment relating to a vehicle loan in the amount of 
$4,965, as alleged in SOR allegation 1.b; a collections account in the amount of $224,  
as alleged in SOR allegation 1.c; a collection account for a former apartment lease in 
the amount of $2,519, as alleged in SOR allegation 1.d; a collection account in the 
amount of $2,957, as alleged in SOR allegation 1.e; a collection account for an 
automobile loan in the amount of $9,275, as alleged in SOR allegation 1.f; and a 
medical account that was placed for collections in the amount of $874, as alleged in 
SOR allegation 1.g. Applicant had not attempted to contact the collection agents 
identified in SOR allegations 1.b, 1.d, and 1.g.  He claimed to dispute the debt identified 
in SOR allegations 1.c and 1.e. He testified he was negotiating payments of $150 per 
month with the creditor identified in 1.f. He failed to present documentation to support 
any of these claims. The debts in SOR allegations 1.b through 1.g are unresolved.  (GE 
2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 20-24; 40-51.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he failed to file his 2011 Federal income tax return, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a, because he had an outstanding W2 form that he did 
not receive because he had moved. He testified that a tax consulting company advised 
 
3 
 
him that if he did not owe additional taxes, there was no penalty for failure to file a 
Federal income tax return for that year. Applicant filed his delinquent 2011 tax return 
after the hearing on September 24, 2016. (GE 1; GE 2; AE B; AE C; AE E; Tr. 19, 34-
40.) 
 
 Applicant provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses, 
but claimed to have $500 left over at the end of the month after meeting his monthly 
expenses. He testified that he lives within his means and only buys things that he 
needs. He does not use credit cards. Applicant claimed to have attended some financial 
counseling, but did not elaborate on the duration or extent of that counseling. (Tr. 57-
62.) 
 
 Applicant presented a letter of recommendation from a friend who has known him 
for 15 years. She indicated that Applicant is a dedicated man, who is giving and 
generous. She believes him to be reliable and trustworthy. (AE F.) Applicant’s 
performance appraisal reflects he consistently exceeds expectations. (AE J.) He has 
received several performance based awards from his employer. (AE G; AE H; AE I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He failed to document he 
resolved any of his delinquencies. Further, he failed to file his 2011 Federal Income tax 
returns as required by law, until after the hearing. The evidence raises security 
concerns under all of these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 
5 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing.  All of Applicant’s delinquent 
accounts remain unresolved. He only recently filed his delinquent Federal income tax 
return for the 2011 tax year. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems are 
unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to his unemployment. However, his first 
period of unemployment was due to his tardiness, a situation within his control. 
Moreover, he failed to establish that he has acted reasonably or responsibly with 
respect to his debts and tax filing obligation. He has not demonstrated that he 
addressed his debts in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been 
established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of the depth or duration of any financial 
counseling. That counseling did not appear to impact his willingness to resolve his 
delinquent accounts alleged on the SOR. Further, there are no clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
or (d) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  Applicant 
performs well at work and is a trusted friend to the individual who wrote him a reference 
letter. However, Applicant’s debts remain largely unresolved. He only recently filed his 
2011 Federal income tax return. While he was given the opportunity to document the 
current status of his debts, he failed to produce evidence of any actions on his 
delinquent accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
