 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04466 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 26, 2016, and he elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 2, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on May 10, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. His response 
to the FORM was received by the DOD on May 31, 2016. The case was assigned to me 
on January 25, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5.1 FORM Item 4 
is an unauthenticated summary of a December 22, 2014 interview with a government 
background investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that he 
could object to FORM Item 4 and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate.  
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by 
me. Applicant responded to the FORM, and he raised no objections. Given Department 
Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s education and work experience, I find his waiver 
to be knowing and intelligent.2 Therefore, FORM Item 4 is admitted into evidence as 
Government Exhibit 4. FORM Items 3 and 5 are admitted into evidence as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 3 and 5, without objection.3 
 
In his FORM response, Applicant included a letter, an email from his bankruptcy 
attorney, correspondence related to his mortgage loan modification, and a loan 
statement. I admitted these four exhibits into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-D, 
without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both alleged collection accounts. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I made the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He received an associate’s degree in June 2003. He 
was a part-time carpenter from November 2006 to July 2014. He was employed full time 
from December 2010 to July 2014 for a private company. He has two children – ages 8 
and 11 – who do not reside with him.4 
 
                                                          
1 FORM Items 1 and 2 consist of the Statement of Reasons and Applicant’s Answer, which are pleadings 
and are entered into the administrative record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.  The Judge’s exclusion of the Report of Interview, containing 
mitigating evidence, was found to be error following an applicant’s appeal.).   
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 14-06781 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016) (By not responding to the Government’s 
FORM, “Applicant waived any objection he might have had to this document.”). 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 In December 2007, Applicant and an associate opened a restaurant. He used 
personal credit accounts to purchase equipment and for other business expenses. The 
restaurant was unsuccessful and was closed in January 2010.5  
 
 The two collection accounts became delinquent in September 2010 in the 
approximate amounts of $8,155 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and $5,991 (SOR ¶ 1.b.). Applicant 
admitted both debts and that he never made any payments on these accounts. He 
claims to have contacted the creditors to arrange payments in about 2014; however, 
there is no documentation that he did so.6 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to his failed restaurant business 
and his period of underemployment. He demonstrated that he modified his mortgage 
loan account and that it was current as of April 2015.7 He also provided email 
correspondence indicating that a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was filed in 2016, but 
the case remained pending as of May 2016.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 GE 4; Response to SOR; Response to FORM. 
 
6 GE 4; GE 5; Response to SOR; Response to FORM. 
 
7 AE C; AE D; Response to SOR; GE 5. 
 
8 GE 5; Response to SOR; Response to FORM. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s two debts – delinquent since September 2010 – total approximately 
$14,146. Accordingly, the evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
 
5 
 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.9 Conditions that could 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.10 
 
There is no documentary evidence to show that Applicant made any payments 
on his two delinquent accounts. Because the debts are ongoing and unresolved, AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both (1) Applicant’s financial indebtedness 
resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.11 Applicant’s employment history indicates that he has been 
employed full time since December 2010. Between November 2006 and December 
2010, he was employed part time as a carpenter and was self-employed with his 
restaurant. Because Applicant’s period of underemployment and failed business may 
have hindered his ability to address his delinquent debts, they constitute circumstances 
beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.12 Applicant claims to have contacted the creditors in about 2014; 
however, there is no documentation of his efforts. Applicant provided no further 
                                                          
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
10 Applicant does not dispute either debt. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) is not potentially applicable. 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
 
6 
 
explanation as to what other efforts, if any, were made to resolve these debts prior to 
the issuance of the SOR. He did contact a bankruptcy attorney and appears to have 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2016. There is no information as to what debts were 
included in the bankruptcy case, and the debts had not been discharged as of May 
2016. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant acted responsibly to 
address his delinquent debts or to develop and implement a reasonable debt repayment 
plan.  Therefore, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is neither record evidence of credit counseling nor evidence, such as a 
monthly budget, to conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Rather, the absence of evidence of payments or other 
steps to resolve the alleged delinquent debts undercuts such a conclusion.  Therefore, 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”13 
There is no evidence of any payments on the delinquent debts since September 2010.  
Applicant has filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. Although a legal course of action, a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing is not enough to show a good-faith effort to resolve debts.14 
As discussed above, there is insufficient evidence of good-faith payments or other steps 
taken to resolve the alleged delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
The two admitted debts have remained delinquent since 2010 without any 
payments. Absent evidence of debt repayment and financial responsibility, I find that 
financial considerations concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016). See also ISCR 12-01664 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Jan. 17, 2014). 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control – his underemployment and failed 
business – contributed to his financial delinquencies. Although he has filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy petition, there is no evidence demonstrating that the two alleged debts are 
included in the bankruptcy. Furthermore, the debts had not been discharged. More 
importantly, there is no evidence of good-faith efforts to repay or resolve these debts or 
evidence that Applicant meets his current financial obligations. As a result, the totality of 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
