1  
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )                  ISCR Case No.: 15-01979     
  )                
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence).  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
October 24, 2013. On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence.2 
 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2  
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 10, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on February 3, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 4, 2016, and in response, 
forwarded Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. 
 
The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 3) are admitted into evidence without objection. In 
addition, Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of Government 
documents from which relevant facts about Israel are derived.  
 
Concerning the facts submitted for administrative notice, Department Counsel 
requested that I notice cases involving espionage by some U.S. government employees 
and illegal export cases implicating Israeli officials and companies. While that 
information is relevant to the issue of whether Israel actively pursues collection of U.S. 
intelligence and economic and proprietary information, none of the cases involved 
Applicant personally or involved espionage through any family relationships. The 
anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased 
relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, given there is no evidence 
that Applicant or any member of his family was involved in any aspect of the cited 
cases. With these caveats, the facts administratively noticed are set forth below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR,3 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations with 
explanations annotated on the SOR and in a separate document. His admissions and 
explanations, including corrections made in his response to the FORM, are incorporated 
in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old senior operations engineer, employed by a defense 
contractor since 1980. He was assigned overseas since at least 2007. He worked in 
Turkey from 2007 to 2009; Israel from 2009 to 2014; and South Korea from 2014 to 
December 2015. He is currently assigned and resides in Taiwan. He has held a security 
clearance for more than 30 years.4  He is a U.S. citizen by birth, and is not a citizen of 
any other country. 
 
Applicant was previously married in 1985 and divorced in 2010. He has two adult 
children from his first marriage that reside in the United States. He met his current 
                                                     
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Item 2; AE B and C. 
 
3  
spouse while he was assigned to work in Israel, and lived with her and at least one 
stepchild in Israel. He remarried in 2011. His spouse was born in Cyprus, Greece, and 
is an Israeli citizen.5 According to Applicant, she is applying for lawful permanent 
residency status in the United States (green card).6 She owns a home in Israel, with an 
estimated value of $120,000.7 Applicant claims to have no ownership interest in the 
home.  
 
Applicant’s spouse has three adult children, his stepchildren, who are citizens 
and residents of Israel. His stepchildren live in his spouse’s Israeli home.8 Applicant’s 
spouse and stepchildren completed compulsory military service in the Israeli military. 
His stepdaughter completed her military service in 2014, and is attending college. She 
is also applying for permanent residency status in the United States. A stepson 
graduated from college in 2015 with a degree in accounting, but his current employment 
is unknown. His other stepson is employed as a restaurant chef, and has two children.9 
Applicant’s mother-in-law passed away in 2015. Applicant’s spouse lives with him, and 
he maintains regular in-person and telephonic contact with his stepchildren in Israel. 
  
The record is devoid of substantive background information on Applicant’s 
spouse and stepchildren. Significantly, there is no information with respect to their 
Israeli military service, including dates of service, rank, division in which they served, or 
military training and specialty. Additionally, the record does not show their work history, 
education, current employment, or documentary evidence of U.S. permanent residence 
applications and their current status. 
 
Applicant asserts that he and his family are law-abiding citizens, and they do not 
belong to any special interest group or organization that may conflict with his personal 
or professional life. He stresses that he is a loyal U.S. citizen and employee, and will 
always reside primarily in the United States. He notes that his colleagues can vouch for 
him, but did not include any documentary evidence of character or employment 
performance.10 
 
 I note that Israel is a parliamentary democracy with a diversified, technologically 
advanced economy. Almost half of Israel’s exports are high technology, including 
electronic and biomedical equipment. Israel is a close ally of the United States, and the 
United States is its largest trading partner. Israel has been identified as a major 
practitioner of industrial espionage against U.S. companies. There have been instances 
                                                     
5 Item 3. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 No documentary evidence was submitted establishing the value of the home. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
9 Item 3; AE B. 
 
10 AE B. Applicant did not provide character letters or other documentary evidence supporting his 
assertions. 
4  
of illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to 
Israel. Israel has become a major global leader in arms exports, and the United States 
and Israel have periodically disagreed over Israeli sales of sensitive U.S. and Israeli 
technologies to third-party countries, including India, China and Russia. 
 
 The U.S. and Israel have close cultural, historic, and political ties. They 
participate in joint military planning and training, and have collaborated on military 
research and weapons development. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a 
cornerstone of U.S. Middle East policy since the state of Israel’s creation in 1948. Israel 
generally respects the rights of its citizens. When human-rights violations have 
occurred, they have involved Palestinian detainees or Arab-Israelis. Terrorist suicide 
bombings are a continuing threat in Israel, and U.S. citizens in Israel are advised to be 
cautious.  
 
 Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship or have a claim to 
dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other legal purposes. U.S. 
citizens visiting Israel have been subjected to prolonged questioning and thorough 
searches by Israeli authorities upon entry or departure. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527.  The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5  
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of Israel (SOR ¶ 1.a), but currently lives with 
Applicant in Taiwan. Applicant’s stepdaughter and two stepsons are citizens and 
residents of Israel (SOR ¶ 1.b and c). His mother-in-law has passed away (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
Applicant’s spouse owns a home in Israel, where they resided while he was assigned to 
Israel (SOR ¶ 1.e). His spouse and stepchildren served in the Israeli military. The 
security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a [trustworthiness] concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
6  
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s connections to Israel raise three disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member or financial interests subject to a foreign government. The 
totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family 
tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd.  ar. 29, 2002). 
 
 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
7  
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 The Israeli citizenship of Applicant’s spouse and stepchildren, some of whom 
reside in Israel, coupled with their connection to the Israeli military, albeit mandatory 
service, are sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and raise the 
potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). His spouse’s ownership of property that 
Applicant resided in while living in Israel, and that is currently occupied by one or more 
of his stepchildren, is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. Four members of Applicant’s immediate family are 
citizens of Israel, three reside in Israel and they all have or had military connections to 
Israel. Applicant’s spouse also owns property in Israel that is occupied by her children. 
These family ties, coupled with Israel’s record of industrial espionage, preclude a finding 
that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government, and the 
interests of the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. In terms of allegiance, Applicant has one foot in the 
United States and one foot in Israel. While he has strong ties to the United States and 
has held longstanding employment and a security clearance, he also has strong ties to 
8  
Israel through his marriage to an Israeli citizen with children and grandchildren who are 
residents and citizens of Israel. Without additional facts that were not contained in the 
record, I am not convinced that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. 
interests. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. Applicant has frequent contact with his spouse, 
stepchildren and presumably his grandchildren. He has not overcome the rebuttable 
presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not 
casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
 AG ¶ 8(f) is not established. Applicant’s spouse owns property in Israel, 
presumably worth $120,000, that they occupied together while assigned to Israel, and is 
now occupied by some or all of his stepchildren. Despite his claim to have no interest in 
the property, his past use of the home and current use by his family show an indirect 
interest not reflected in the title. Although there is no evidence that the Israeli 
government uses the financial assets of its citizens as leverage to gain industrial and 
proprietary information, his indirect interest in the home used by his family members has 
the potential to result in a conflict of interest. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  In applying the whole- 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. The record is devoid of material facts about Applicant’s spouse and 
stepchildren that may resolve security concerns raised in the SOR. Based on the 
information available, I find Applicant’s divided loyalties and foreign financial interests 
preclude a finding that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on his vulnerability to 
foreign influence. 
 
9 
 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c, and 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
