   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-08262 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 13 delinquent debts totaling 
$37,602. Four SOR debts are mitigated: he disputed one debt; one debt is a duplication; 
and his two student loans are in deferment status. He did not make any payments to any 
of his SOR creditors. Applicant did not make sufficient progress resolving the debts 
alleged in his SOR. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On April 17, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On April 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
   
 
2 
 
 
a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). 
 
On June 6, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
August 8, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On September 8, 2016, the 
case was assigned to me. On November 18, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for December 8, 2016. 
(HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
four exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 19-23; GE 1-
4; AE A-D) On December 16, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the hearing transcript.    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, and he denied the remaining SOR allegations.   
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old assembly mechanic, who has worked for his employer 
since June 2015. (Tr. 5, 27-28; GE 1) In 2007, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 5) He 
attended a technical college, and in 2008, he received a diploma. (Tr. 6) He attended 
Army basic training; however, he received a medical discharge during basic training. (Tr. 
7) He has never married; however, he has been living with his partner for nine years. (Tr. 
8) They have one nine-year-old child. (Tr. 7) They live with Applicant’s mother. (Tr. 26) 
Applicant contributes to the household expenses. (Tr. 26) There is no evidence of 
violations of his employer’s rules, drug abuse, alcohol abuse, or criminal infractions. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Some of the negative entries on Applicant’s credit report are from his father, who 
has the same name as Applicant. (Tr. 23-24, 40) His father was released from prison two 
years ago after more than 20 years in prison. (Tr. 23-24, 40, 48-50) Applicant was 
successful in disputing several negative entries on his credit report. (Tr. 49-50)  
 
Applicant’s hourly salary is $13.36. (Tr. 25) He has filed his state and federal 
income tax returns for the last five years. (Tr. 25) He owes the state tax authority $312 
for tax year 2015, and he recently made his second payment to the state tax authority. 
(Tr. 25) He did not describe receipt of financial counseling, and he does not use a written 
budget. (Tr. 26) Applicant does not necessarily have a remainder after his monthly bills 
are paid, and he has no savings. (Tr. 27) He has about $4,000 in a 401(k) account. (Tr. 
27) Applicant has had periods of unemployment, and he lived off welfare. (Tr. 28) 
Applicant is considering how and when he will start paying his SOR debts. (Tr. 47) He 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits. 
   
 
3 
 
 
acknowledged that he made poor choices in the past, and he promised to get his finances 
under control and to pay his debts. (Tr. 53-62) 
  
Applicant’s SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts totaling $37,602. His SOR debts are 
documented in his July 29, 2015 Office of Personnel Management personal subject 
interview (OPM PSI), credit reports, and hearing record, and their status is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $1,014 judgment filed in 2012, which resulted when Applicant 
became unemployed and broke a lease for an apartment. (Tr. 30; GE 4 at 2) The creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.c, which alleges a collection debt for $3,389, is attempting to collect on the 
judgment. (Tr. 32) Applicant contacted the creditor; the creditor wanted payment in full; 
and Applicant did not make any payments to address this debt. (Tr. 33-36) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e allege three medical debts placed for collection for $863, 
$863, and $569. Applicant admitted responsibility for these debts; the debts are about 
three years old; and the creditor offered a $50 monthly payment plan to Applicant for each 
debt. (Tr. 33-36; SOR response; AE D at 2) Applicant did not make any payments. (Tr. 
33-34)    
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a medical debt placed for collection for $980. Applicant admitted 
responsibility for the debt; he has not contacted the creditor; and he has not made any 
payments to address this debt. (Tr. 36-37; AE C at 2; AE D at 3) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a medical debt placed for collection for $885. Applicant admitted 
responsibility for the debt; he contacted the creditor; the creditor wanted $100 monthly 
payments; and Applicant did not make any payments to address the debt. (Tr. 38; AE D 
at 3) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h is a medical debt placed for collection for $13,261. Applicant said the 
debt was for inpatient treatment at a hospital in 2012. (Tr. 38, 40; AE C at 2) Applicant 
denied responsibility for the debt because he was never a patient at a hospital. (Tr. 38-
39) He disputed the debt’s presence on his credit report. (Tr. 39) He believes the debt is 
his father’s debt. (Tr. 39, 45-46) He contacted the creditor the week before his hearing, 
and the creditor was unable to locate information connecting the debt to Applicant. (Tr. 
39)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i is a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $497. Applicant 
admitted responsibility for the debt; the debt has been delinquent for several years; he 
agreed with the creditor to pay $50 monthly for seven months; however, he has not made 
his first payment. (Tr. 40-41)   
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k are two student loans placed for collection for $6,176 and 
$7,676. The debts were generated in 2007. (Tr. 42-43) His mother made some payments 
to the creditor, and then she stopped making payments several years ago. (Tr. 43-44) 
Applicant did not make any payments. (Tr. 44) Applicant said the two debts were 
transferred and consolidated. (Tr. 41-42) On September 29, 2015, the new creditor wrote 
   
 
4 
 
 
that Applicant’s payments were deferred because his income was low, and he will need 
to make payments when his income increases. (Tr. 42; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a medical debt placed for collection for $295. Applicant admitted 
responsibility for the debt; he contacted the creditor; and he has not made any payments 
to address this debt. (Tr. 44; GE 4 at 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a parking ticket debt or debts placed for collection for $684. 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the debt; the debt was generated in 2012; he has not 
contacted the creditor; and he has not made any payments to address this debt. (Tr. 44-
45) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
   
 
5 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation 
omitted) explained the scope and rationale for the financial considerations security 
concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
   
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
7 
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some important mitigating information. Several circumstances 
beyond his control adversely affected his finances. Applicant had some periods of 
unemployment or underemployment. He did not provide enough specifics about how 
these circumstances adversely affected his finances, and he did not show that he acted 
responsibly to address his delinquent SOR debts during his current employment. Three 
SOR medical creditors offered to accept $50 monthly payments, and he did not establish 
he was unable to make $50 payments to even one creditor. 
 
Four SOR debts are mitigated: he credibly disputed the medical in SOR ¶ 1.h 
($13,261); the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,014) is a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($3,839); and his two student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($6,176) and 1.k ($7,676) are in 
deferment status.  
 
Applicant is not credited with mitigating the other SOR debts because he did not 
provide sufficient documentation showing progress paying the debts, a reasonable 
dispute of any debts, or an inability to make monthly payments on at least one of the SOR 
debts.   
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving the SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
   
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old assembly mechanic, who has worked for his employer 
since June 2015. He attended a technical college, and in 2008, he received a diploma. 
He has never married; however, he has been living with his partner for nine years. They 
have one nine-year-old child, and they live with Applicant’s mother. There is no evidence 
of violations of his employer’s rules, drug abuse, alcohol abuse, or criminal infractions. 
 
Applicant is credited with mitigating SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($1,014), 1.h ($13,261), 1.j 
($6,176), and 1.k ($7,676); however, the financial evidence against approval of 
Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial 
problems as several debts became delinquent in 2012, and there is no evidence of any 
payments over the previous four years. He was reminded of his delinquent debts during 
his OPM interview, and progress addressing his delinquent debts has been minimal. He 
did not describe receipt of financial counseling, and he does not use a written budget. He 
did not provide enough specifics about how the circumstances beyond his control 
adversely affected his finances, and he did not show that he acted responsibly to address 
his delinquent debts. His failure to make greater progress resolving his SOR debts shows 
lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG 
¶ 18.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). 
Unmitigated financial considerations security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of 
a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not 
be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform 
necessary for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior 
consistent with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence 
of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
   
 
9 
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at 
this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs l.l and 1.m:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
