KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence nor shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 15-06868.a1
DATE: 02/16/2017
DATE: February 16, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06868
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 19, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2,
1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 18, 2016, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Jennifer I.
Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since 2010.  He served on active duty from
1993 to 1996 and in the National Guard since then.  He holds the pay grade of E-7.  Applicant is
divorced and has no children.
Applicant has been arrested and/or convicted of DWI/DUI several times since 1995, when
he operated his car with a .19% blood alcohol level, crashing into a tree stump.  Two years later, he
drove off a freeway after drinking about 8 beers.  His penalty included 36 months probation, a fine,
and mandatory attendance in alcohol classes.  In 2001, Applicant was again arrested for DUI. 
Although he testified that he had drunk only two beers, in a 2006 interview he stated that the number
was four or five.  Ultimately this charge was dismissed pursuant to a plea bargain.
In December 2011, Applicant was again charged with DUI.  He had consumed about six
beers and felt sleepy as he was driving his car along a freeway.  Upon investigating, the police
administered a field sobriety test, which Applicant failed.  He was sentenced to a fine, attendance 
at an alcohol class, and 36 months probation.  Applicant was arrested yet again for DUI in August
2012.  After consuming about six beers, he hit a parked car with his own car and fled the scene.  He
was still on probation for this offense at the close of the record.
Applicant attended alcohol counseling from July 2013 until February 2015, completing 52
group sessions.  He stated that he did not receive a diagnosis.  Applicant drinks about four to five
beers a week and stated that he barely consumes alcohol.  He testified that he drinks much less than
he did during the pendency of his divorce.
A character reference corroborated that Applicant had gone through a difficult divorce and
was “on a path to success.”  Decision at 4.  Applicant has had no security violations.  In addition,
the Judge also found that some of the SOR allegations of DUI were merely repeats of the incidents. 
The Judge’s Analysis
As noted above, the Judge resolved all of the Guideline E allegations in Applicant’s favor. 
However, she resolved the Guidelines G and J allegations against him.  She cited to Applicant’s
history of alcohol abuse and his continued drinking, and she concluded that the four years that have
passed since Applicant’s last incident are not enough to show that his judgment is sound.  She also
noted that Applicant is not participating in any sort of treatment program.  Regarding Guideline J,
the Judge stated that Applicant had failed to present evidence of rehabilitation.  In the whole-person
analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s character reference, but she concluded that his extensive
prior misconduct and his continued consumption of alcohol militate against a determination that his
security-significant conduct is behind him.  
2
Discussion
Applicant draws our attention to various aspects of the record that he believes are favorable
to him, such as the length of time since his last offense, evidence that his probationary status is to
ensure payment of his fines after which he can ask for it to be removed, the effect that his marital
problems had on his drinking, etc.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov.
22, 2016).  Neither is his argument enough to show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).   
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
