 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02430 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
 On April 13, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006. 
  
Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR (Answer) on November 17, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On June 20, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On July 19, 2016, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for hearing on August 5, 2016. The 
case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GXs) 
1 through 4 into evidence without objection. Despite the record being left open until 
 
2 
 
 
September 6, 2016, Applicant offered no Exhibits, only a written closing statement.  
Applicant testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (TR) on 
August 15, 2016.                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 60 years old. (GX 1 at page 5.)  She is employed by a health care 
provider. (TR at page 16 lines 7~13.)  She is married, and her daughter and her 
daughter’s family are living with Applicant and her husband.  (GX 1 at pages 20~22, and 
TR at page 23 line 24 to page 24 at line 6.) 
 
 The SOR contained 21 allegations related to delinquent debts and a foreclosure. 
Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegations of the SOR; and as such, they are 
considered denied.  However, the alleged debts are listed on credit reports accessed 
from May of 2014, December of 2014, and March of 2016.  (GXs 2~4.) 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes her current financial difficulties to health issues, and to 
periods of unemployment for herself, her husband, and her daughter’s husband, as they 
now live with Applicant.  (TR at page 16 line 7 to page 20 line 24, and at page 23 line 25 
to page 24 line 22.)  Their current monthly income is about $4,000.  (TR at page 22 line 
18 to page 24 line 22.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant is indebted to State A, as the result of a tax judgment in the 
amount of about $9,925.  She has offered nothing to show she is addressing this 
outstanding judgment.  (TR at page 20 line 25 to page 22 line 17, and at page 26 line 17 
to page 28 line 13.) 
 
 1.b. and 1.c.  Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government, as the result of 
tax judgments in an amount totaling about $122,547.  She has offered nothing to show 
she is addressing these outstanding judgments.  (Id.) 
 
 1.d.~1.q.  Applicant is indebted to numerous health care providers for past-due 
debts totaling about $35,118.  She has offered nothing to show she is addressing these 
outstanding debts.  (TR at page 38 line 17 to page 29 line 12.) 
 
 1.r.~1.t.  Applicant is indebted to three additional health care providers for past-
due debts totaling about $590.  She has offered nothing to show she is addressing 
these outstanding debts.  (TR at page 29 lines 13~20.) 
 
 1.u.  I find that the alleged past-due debt to Creditor U in the amount of $120 is 
her son’s debt; and as such, this allegation is found for Applicant.  (TR at page 24 line 
23 to page 25 line 4.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.v.  Applicant lost a house in March of 2012 as the result of a foreclosure.  (TR 
at page 25 lines 5~25.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel 
. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F- Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified [or sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. Her actions 
have demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  One Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 is potentially 
applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss on employment, . . . unexpected 
medical emergency . . .) and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Although the evidence shows that Applicant’s current financial difficulties can be 
attributed to periods of unemployment and health, she has done little to address her 
rather substantial past-due debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public 
trust position. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from her delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.~1.t.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                               
 
  
_______________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
