 
  1
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 15-02846 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced circumstances largely beyond her control that caused her 
financial issues, but mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations).  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on January 14, 2013. On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2015, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on February 16, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
 
  2
(FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant 
on February 17, 2016. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the 
FORM on February 26, 2016, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on 
November 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old customer claims associate employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2013. She has completed course work at two colleges and was 
enrolled in classes in 2012, when she completed her e-QIP. She married in 2003, and 
she and her husband have two children ages 12 and 10. This is her first application for 
a public trust position. (GX 3.)   
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes 25 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$29,303. In her Answer, Applicant admitted all of the debts and stated that she entered 
repayment plans with all but three of the creditors. According to her Answer, Applicant 
made the first payment on one SOR debt in June 2015. She contacted the creditor of 15 
SOR debts, all medical accounts, and arranged for the accounts to be consolidated. 
She made her first bi-monthly payment of $25 on December 11, 2015. She was 
scheduled to make the first payment on five additional SOR debts in January 2016 and 
on the remaining SOR debt in February 2016. Applicant’s admissions in her Answer are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.   
  
The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) 
from March 2015 and January 2013. (GX 4; GX 5.) She listed a number of her 
delinquent accounts on her e-QIP, and discussed many of the accounts during her 
personal subject interview (PSI) on March 5, 2013. (GX 3; GX 6.) 
 
The $10,125 charged-off debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for a vehicle loan. 
Applicant contacted the creditor and agreed to make monthly payments of $100 which 
were due to start in January 2015. The March 2015 CBR indicates that a revised 
payment plan began in January 2015.  
 
The $4,058 charged-off debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is for a vehicle loan. The 
March 2015 CBR indicates that a revised payment plan began in January 2015. 
Applicant contacted the creditor in November 2015 entered a monthly repayment plan 
of $75, which was due to start in January 2016.  
 
The $484 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is the past-due amount on a $3,925 student-
loan debt. The March 2015 CBR shows that a revised payment plan began in 
                                                            
1 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated February 17, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated February 26, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after receiving it to submit information.  The DOHA transmittal letter and receipt are 
appended to the record as Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 
 
  3
December 2014. Applicant contacted the creditor and agreed to a repayment plan of $5 
a month beginning in June 2015.  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is for a delinquent student loan owed to the 
university from which she took on-line courses. Applicant contacted the university about 
a repayment plan, but it required four installment payments of $587, which Applicant 
was unable to make. She intends to repay this debt. 
 
Applicant provided a document with her Answer from a student-loan collection 
agency that lists a principal balance of $8,879 and confirms an agreement of monthly 
payments of $5 beginning on December 26, 2015. Applicant stated in her Answer that 
this document pertains to both student loan accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e, but 
that the monthly payment is applied only to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
The $2,349 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is for Applicant’s unpaid rent at a prior 
residence. She was unable to locate the current creditor and that the debt remains 
unresolved. 
 
The $1,795 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is owed to a cellular company. Applicant 
arranged a monthly repayment plan of $25 that was scheduled to start in February 
2016. 
 
The $1,376 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is for a vehicle loan. Applicant arranged a 
$50 monthly payment scheduled to begin in January 2015 as an automatic withdrawal 
from her checking account. (Answer.) 
 
The $869 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is owed to a cable company. Applicant 
contacted the company and was informed that the actual balance owed was $469 
because Applicant had returned some equipment. The company stated it would report 
the correct balance to the credit-reporting agencies. The balance on this debt is 
unresolved. 
 
The $469 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n is for a personal loan used for living 
expenses. Applicant made a $20 payment over the phone in December 2015 and will 
continue to make monthly payments of $20 until the debt is paid in full. (GX 6; Answer.) 
 
The $402 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o is owed to a cellular company. According to 
her Answer, Applicant arranged for $24 monthly payments to be deducted from her 
checking account beginning in January 2016.  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.p through 1.y are for medical 
accounts totaling $4,004, which Applicant consolidated and has been making $25 bi-
weekly payments since December 11, 2015. In May 2009, Applicant sprained her ankle 
and was treated at the emergency room. She was uninsured and thus was personally 
liable for the costs of the treatment. Applicant provided the new account number 
assigned to the consolidated debts. (Answer.) 
 
  4
 
Applicant was unemployed from March 2012 until October 2012, which resulted 
in financial hardship. She was unable to pay her rent, resulting in the $2,349 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. She was also unemployed from January 2010 until March 2011, 
and stated in her PSI that this period of unemployment caused her financial difficulties. 
In October 2012, Applicant was deemed at-fault in a car accident. She was unaware 
that at the time of the accident, her insurance, which was paid through direct withdrawal 
from her bank account, had lapsed. Her car was totaled, and she remained liable for the 
balance on the loan. She was also fined $700, which she paid off in $50 monthly 
payments. (Answer; GX 6.) 
 
In her Answer, Applicant explained that her husband was unemployed from April 
2013 until November 2013, when he found temporary employment. The temporary 
employment ended in April 2014 and he was unemployed until October 2015. Applicant 
stated that going from a dual-income household to a single-income household caused 
her to be unable to pay her outstanding debts. Applicant has not incurred any 
delinquent debt since 2014. (GX 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
 
  5
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
    
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are the result of circumstances largely beyond her 
control. In 2009, she incurred significant unexpected medical expenses as the result of 
an accident. Between 2010 and 2012, she experienced two periods of unemployment 
that total 20 months. In October 2012, she was in a car accident while unintentionally 
uninsured that resulted in additional financial hardship. Between April 2013 and October 
2015, Applicant’s husband was unemployed, except for five months of temporary work. 
She acted responsibly under the circumstances by contacting her creditors to initiate 
repayment plans, consolidating her medical debts into one account, and not incurring 
any new delinquent debt since 2014. The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant 
has gained control over her financial circumstances.  
 
 
  6
 The majority of Applicant’s debts are medical debts that total $4,004. She 
consolidated the debts into a single account with a new account number and has been 
making bi-monthly payments of $50 since December 2015. The record evidence 
substantiates that Applicant has established repayment plans for the vehicle loans 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and for the student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. These 
three debts comprise over 61% of her debt. Of the 25 debts alleged in the SOR, 
Applicant has established repayment plans for all but three.  
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A trustworthiness adjudication is an evaluation 
of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection 
procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required 
to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a 
plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR 
be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 Although Applicant’s financial record is not perfect, she has made a good-faith 
effort to repay her debts and has established a plan to resolve her financial issues 
within her means. AG ¶¶ 20 (a) - (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 
  7
 Applicant and her husband experienced several periods of unemployment which 
were financially destabilizing. However, she has been steadily employed since March 
2013 and has not incurred any recent delinquent debt. She has established and 
maintained repayment plans with the majority of her creditors. Her conduct is consistent 
with that of individuals entrusted with access to sensitive information.  
   
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y:    For Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a position of trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
