   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-02314 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges eight delinquent debts totaling 
$44,134 and foreclosure of his mortgage account. Applicant did not make sufficient 
progress resolving the debts alleged in his SOR. His use of a debt verification or dispute 
company to challenge debts on his credit report did not establish debt resolution or 
mitigation. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On October 11, 2012, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Item 4) On October 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant an SOR pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. The SOR set forth security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. (Item 1)  
 
   
 
2 
 
 
On December 1, 2015, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 2) On March 17, 2016, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On March 25, 2016, Applicant received 
the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On January 28, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. The Government’s case consisted of seven exhibits. (Items 1-7) 
Applicant did not object to any of the Government exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.i and 
the foreclosure in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 3) He indicated all accounts were closed, and he 
provided information about negative accounts being removed from his credit report based 
on disputes filed by a law firm, LL, Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant is 48 years old, and he has been employed in security by a defense 
contractor since November 2012.2 (Item 3) In 1989, he married, and in 1991, he divorced. 
In 1991, he married, and in 2000, he divorced. In 2011, he married. His stepchildren were 
born in 1990, 2001, and 2003, and his children were born in 1989, 1994, 1996, and 1998. 
In 2011, Applicant retired from the Air Force after almost 21 years of active duty service, 
and he is a disabled veteran. He received an honorable discharge. There is no evidence 
that he violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal 
drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance evaluations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SCA, 
Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI), and SOR 
response. Applicant admitted each of the eight delinquent debts totaling $44,134 and 
foreclosure of his mortgage account as indicated in the SOR.  
 
Applicant opened a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) mortgage account in June 
2008. (Item 5) He borrowed $178,762, and his monthly mortgage payment was $1,200. 
(Items 5, 6) His last payment was in 2009. Applicant believed the residence was sold for 
the amount of the mortgage through foreclosure. (Item 5; SOR ¶ 1.a) His 2012 credit 
report reflects the account was “foreclosure redeemed.” (Item 6)3   
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s October 11, 
2012, Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). (Item 1) 
 
3The VA loan guarantee is as follows: “For loans between $45,000 and $144,000, the minimum 
guaranty amount is $22,500, with a maximum guaranty, of up to 40 percent of the loan up to $36,000, 
subject to the amount of entitlement a veteran has available.” As to whether the VA loss on a loan must be 
repaid, the VA explains:   
   
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was unemployed after leaving active duty from February 2011 to October 
2012, except for three months of employment as a private contractor. (Item 4) In his OPM 
PSI, Applicant acknowledged previous responsibility for the debts listed on the SOR, and 
he said they became delinquent around 2008 to 2011. (Items 5, 6) He said he made some 
bad choices and he is “repairing” his credit. (Item 3) He hired LL to dispute negative 
entries on his credit report. (Item 3) On December 1, 2015, LL wrote Applicant that 12 
negative entries were removed from at least one of the three major credit reports. (Item 
3) 
 
In October and November 2015, Applicant received financial counseling. (Item 2) 
His budget indicates he receives income as follows: monthly VA benefits of $3,348; Air 
Force retirement of $1,294; and employment pay of $2,083. (Item 2) He believed he could 
reduce his expenses, and his net monthly remainder would be $719. (Item 2) He did not 
list any payments to SOR creditors on his budget. (Item 2) 
 
 The file lacks any evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. The record 
lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the 
causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that 
Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your 
case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the 
evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
                                            
Must the loan be repaid? 
 
Yes. A VA guaranteed loan is not a gift. It must be repaid, just as you must repay any 
money you borrow. The VA guaranty, which protects the lender against loss, encourages 
the lender to make a loan with terms favorable to the veteran. But if you fail to make the 
payments you agreed to make, you may lose your home through foreclosure, and you and 
your family would probably lose all the time and money you had invested in it. If the lender 
does take a loss, VA must pay the guaranty to the lender, and the amount paid by VA must 
be repaid by you. If your loan closed on or after January 1, 1990, you will owe the 
Government in the event of a default only if there was fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith 
on your part. 
 
Factsheet VAP 26-4 is available on the VA website at http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm= 
1&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CD4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.benefits.va.gov%2Fhomeloans%2Fdocs%2F
vap 26-4 online version.pdf&ei=q4QbU zSCaST0QH0mIDwAg&usg=AF QjCNFv0-ay6SGFdfcDFlaE7aENpSq0cA. 
   
 
4 
 
 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
   
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, OPM PSI, and SOR response. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
   
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant is credited with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.a. His mortgage was guaranteed by 
the VA. His 2012 credit report shows the debt was resolved through foreclosure. Applicant 
was unemployed from February 2011 to October 2012, which is a circumstance beyond 
his control that adversely affected his finances. He received financial counseling, and he 
generated a budget. 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
   
 
7 
 
 
Applicant relies upon the absence of delinquent debts from his current credit report 
to mitigate security concerns. “[T]hat some debts have dropped off his credit report is not 
meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 
2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). The Fair Credit 
Reporting Act requires removal of most negative financial items from a credit report seven 
years from the first date of delinquency or the debt becoming collection barred because 
of a state statute of limitations, whichever is longer.5 Debts may be dropped from a credit 
report upon dispute when creditors believe the debt is not going to be paid or when the 
debt has been charged off.  
 
All states have statutes of limitations upon collectability of credit card debts, which 
range from three to six years. The South Carolina Court of Appeals succinctly explained 
the societal and judicial value of application of the statute of limitations: 
 
Statutes of limitations embody important public policy considerations in that 
they stimulate activity, punish negligence and promote repose by giving 
security and stability to human affairs. The cornerstone policy consideration 
underlying statutes of limitations is the laudable goal of law to promote and 
achieve finality in litigation. Significantly, statutes of limitations provide 
potential defendants with certainty that after a set period of time, they will 
not be ha[iled] into court to defend time-barred claims. Moreover, limitations 
periods discourage plaintiffs from sitting on their rights. Statutes of 
limitations are, indeed, fundamental to our judicial system. 
   
Carolina Marine Handling, Inc. v. Lasch, 363 S.C. 169, 175-76, 609 S.E.2d 548, 552 (S.C. 
Ct. App. 2005) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). As a general statement, 
under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence, debts that are beyond the statute of limitations 
for collections cannot be mitigated solely because they are not collectable.6  
                                            
5Title 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. See Federal Trade Commission website, Summary of Fair Credit 
Reporting Act Updates at Section 605, https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0111-fair-credit-reporting-
act.pdf.  
 
6The statute of limitations clearly and unequivocally ends an Applicant’s legal responsibility to pay 
the creditor after the passage of a certain amount of time, as specified in state law. In a series of decisions 
the Appeal Board has rejected the statute of limitations for debts generated through contracts, which is the 
law in all 50 states, as automatically mitigating financial considerations concerns under AG ¶ 20(d). See 
ISCR Case No. 08-01122 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 
2008); ADP Case No. 07-13041 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 29, 2008) ADP Case No. 06-14616 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 18, 2007) (stating, “reliance upon legal 
defenses such as the statute of limitations does not necessarily demonstrate prudence, honesty, and 
reliability; therefore, such reliance is of diminished probative value in resolving trustworthiness concerns 
arising out of financial problems. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).”). This 
opinion does not assert that the statute of limitations provides any mitigation under Guideline F; however, 
this aspect of Applicant’s financial situation is a circumstance which may explain Applicant’s failure to take 
more timely and aggressive actions to resolve his delinquent debts. The Appeal Board has not defined how 
long after the statute of limitations expires an Applicant must wait before receiving a fresh start similar to 
that received when debts are discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.     
     
   
 
8 
 
 
Recently, the DOHA Appeal Board reinforced its position on statutes of limitations 
not mitigating financial considerations concerns stating: 
 
In this case, the Judge noted that Applicant explained that he did not owe 
any of the alleged debts because they had either been deleted from his 
credit report or soon would be deleted, and he also relied on a state statute 
of limitations to absolve himself of debts. The Appeal Board has long 
recognized that debts remain relevant for security clearance purposes even 
if they are no longer enforceable due to the running of the statute of 
limitations or cannot be legally listed on a credit report due to the passage 
of time. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 20, 2005) 
and ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 6 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006).7 We also have 
held that reliance on a state’s statute of limitations does not constitute a 
good-faith effort to resolve financial difficulties and is of limited mitigative 
value. ADP Case No. 06-18900 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 20, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 01-
09691 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003)). 
 
ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016). 
 
Applicant did not expressly rely upon the statute of limitations to avoid paying his 
creditors. Based on his SOR response, and the correspondence from LL, he did not 
realize the SOR debts dropped from his credit report, without more evidence about why 
the debts were removed from his credit report, remain unresolved for security clearance 
purposes.8  
 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what he did to address his SOR 
debts over the last five years. He did not provide sufficient documentation relating to any 
of his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish 
maintenance of contact;9 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was 
                                            
7Compare ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2014). In that case, Applicant corroborated 
efforts to settle debts that were in “charged-off” status. Also, that Applicant had received financial 
counseling. Ultimately, the Board affirmed the Judge’s favorable decision. 
 
8The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).   
 
9“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
   
 
9 
 
 
responsible for the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was 
attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all 
the circumstances, he failed to meet his burden and establish mitigation of financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 48 years old, and he has been employed by a defense contractor since 
November 2012, as an access control monitor. In 2011, he married. His stepchildren were 
born in 1990, 2001, and 2003, and his children were born in 1989, 1994, 1996, and 1998. 
In 2011, Applicant retired from the Air Force after almost 21 years of active duty service, 
and he is a disabled veteran. He received an honorable discharge. There is no evidence 
that he violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal 
drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance evaluations.  
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for eight delinquent debts totaling $44,134. He is 
credited with the resolution of his mortgage account through foreclosure and the VA loan 
guarantee. Unemployment after he retired from the Air Force adversely affected his 
finances. He received financial counseling, and he generated a budget.  
   
 
10 
 
 
Applicant provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary 
evidence of payments and established payment plans for his SOR debts. His actions 
show lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG 
¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented 
financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
