                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07228
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred delinquent or past-due debts through circumstances that are
unlikely to recur. He acted responsibly to pay or otherwise resolve his debts, and his
current finances are sound. The security concerns about Applicant’s finances are
mitigated and his request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 22, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his
employment with a government contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a
security clearance.  1
On March 30, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for financial2
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
1
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and
requested a hearing. I received the case on September 26, 2016, and convened the
requested hearing on November 16, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled.
Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.  Applicant and one3
witness testified. Applicant also presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - E. A transcript
of the hearing (Tr.) was received on November 23, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $23,100 for 11
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.k). In response, Applicant denied, with
explanations, the debts alleged at SOR 1.I and 1.k. He admitted, with explanation, the
remaining SOR allegations (Answer). 
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed the debts alleged at SOR 1.a,
1.b, 1.d - 1.g, 1.j and 1.k. Credit reports obtained during the ensuing background
investigation document these and the remaining debts alleged. Applicant also discussed
these debts and his financial problems during his subject interview with a Government
investigator in April 2015. In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following
findings of fact.
Applicant is 42 years old and works for a construction company doing business
with the federal government through contracts that require Applicant be eligible for
access to classified information. He has worked for that company since December
2014. Applicant’s supervisor testified that Applicant is a superior employee who, while
he held an interim clearance, demonstrated he will handle classified information
correctly and reliably. The witness was familiar with the issues that concern the
Government in this case. He nonetheless recommended Applicant for a clearance
based on his observation of Applicant’s work ethic, character, and expertise. Numerous
other personal and professional references voiced the same sentiments in their written
letters of recommendation and support. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. D; Tr. 26 - 36)
Applicant and his wife have been married since December 2014. Applicant was
previously married from May 1996 until August 2008; however, he and his ex-wife later
attempted to reconcile and lived together from about December 2009 until sometime in
2012. Applicant has had custody of their two children, now ages 20 and 16, since 2009,
but never sought or received financial help from his ex-wife. Their marriage failed
because Applicant’s ex-wife became addicted to pain medications. Her drug-related
behavior often manifested itself through mismanagement of their finances. Money
intended for payment of bills was often used for drugs or other activities that
undermined Applicant’s family’s financial health. These circumstances were further
exacerbated by the fact that Applicant was often away for work and unaware the bills
were not being paid. Finally, as part of the national economic recession, Applicant
experienced a period of underemployment between late 2009 and late 2011. (Gx. 1; Tr.
49 - 52)
In response to the SOR, Applicant presented information that established he had
paid or otherwise resolved the debts at SOR 1.b - 1.f, 1.h, and 1.j. At hearing, he
updated his Answer and established that all of the debts alleged have been paid or
otherwise resolved, even though some of the debts were attributable to his ex-wife.
 At Department Counsel’s request, I have included, as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1, a copy of the June 9, 20163
letter that forwarded Gx. 1 - 4 to Applicant, in accordance with Directive Section E3.1.13.
2
Applicant’s information shows that his efforts to repay his debts, in several instances,
began well before the SOR was issued. He has taken responsibility for the debts from
his first marriage and acknowledged that he should have been better at monitoring their
finances even though he was away for long periods of time. (Answer; Ax. A; Ax. E; Tr.
37 - 40)
Applicant also presented information that established his current finances are
sound. He has a significant positive cash flow each month after meeting all of his
expenses. He has incurred no new unpaid or past-due debts. (Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. E)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
 See Directive, 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
3
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant incurred significant unpaid debt through a combination of his ex-wife’s
drug-related financial malfeasance and his own lack of attention to their finances. The
debts at issue went unaddressed for about three years. Available information requires
application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant started paying his past-due debts well before the SOR was issued and
he has fully resolved all of the debts alleged in the SOR. More important, his personal
and professional circumstances have improved and he is unlikely to experience such
financial problems in the future. His prompt and thorough resolution of his financial
problems reflects well on his judgment and reliability. His finances are healthy and he is
well-positioned to handle any unplanned financial events in the future. I conclude from
all of the foregoing that the security concerns about Applicant’s finances have been
mitigated.
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has an excellent reputation among his friends and associates for
trustworthiness and good judgment. He has demonstrated that he can be entrusted with
sensitive information. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record evidence as a
whole supports a conclusion that the security concerns about Applicant’s finances have
been mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
5
