 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05025 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 5, 
2014. On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline G. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), 
and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2015, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on March 7, 2016. On March 8, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
 2
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. The 
FORM included the SOR (Item 1), two administrative documents (Items 2 and 3), 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Item 4), his SCA (Item 5), his arrest records (Items 6-
10) and a summary of personal subject interviews (PSI) on February 5 and February 12, 
2015 (Item 11). He received the FORM on March 16, 2016, and did not respond.1 The 
case was assigned to me on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations, with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old analyst employed by a defense contractor since 
August 2012. He attended a community college from January 2008 to May 2010 and 
received an associate’s degree. He worked part time as a DOD employee from August 
2010 to a date not reflected in the record, and he received a security clearance in 
connection with his DOD employment in March 2011. He is physically disabled and 
requires use of a wheel chair.  
 
 Applicant married in August 1997 and divorced in February 2007. He married his 
current spouse in October 2011. He has two children from his first marriage, ages 16 
and 15, and one from his current marriage, age 3. 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant was arrested in November 2002 for 
possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in a motor vehicle. The basis for 
this allegation is not reflected in the record, but Applicant admitted the arrest in his 
answer to the SOR. He explained that he was driving a vehicle with a bag of empty 
beverage cans in the vehicle, but no one consumed alcohol in the vehicle. The record 
does not reflect the disposition of the charge. 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant was charged with “Alcohol Intoxication 
1st/2nd” in May 2003. The basis for this allegation is not reflected in the record, but 
Applicant admitted it. The record does not reflect the circumstances of the incident or 
the disposition of the charge. 
 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to make corrections, additions, deletions, 
and updates to Item 11 She also informed him that he was entitled to object to consideration of Item 5 on 
the ground that it was not authenticated. His failure to respond to the FORM constitutes a waiver of any 
objection to Item 11. See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) (“Although pro se 
applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to 
protect their rights under the Directive.”). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his SCA (Item 5) unless otherwise indicated by a 
parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 The SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant was charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI) in February 2004. The police records reflect that he was convicted, 
sentenced to “1 day,” and his driver’s license was suspended for 120 days. (Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant was charged with DUI in July 2006. The 
offense occurred on a military installation. Records of the U.S. magistrate on the 
installation reflect that Applicant was given a breathalyzer test which registered a blood-
alcohol level of .147. He was convicted of DUI, barred from the installation for 12 
months, and fined $360. (Item 7.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that Applicant was charged with alcohol intoxication in a 
public place in August 2008. Police records reflect the charge but not the circumstances 
or disposition. (Item 8.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.f alleges that Applicant was charged with operating a motor vehicle 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs in May 2014 and was convicted. According to 
Appellant’s account of the incident in his answer to the SOR and in the PSI, his wife 
was driving their car to run an errand and he was riding in the passenger seat. While 
backing out of a parking place, she hit another vehicle. She called the police and exited 
the car to wait for the police. Applicant moved from the passenger seat to the driver’s 
seat. The police arrived and found Applicant in the driver’s seat and the keys in the 
ignition. In the PSI, Applicant said he could not exit from the driver’s seat before they 
arrived, because he did not have his wheel chair. He did not explain how he moved 
from the passenger seat to the driver’s seat without his wheel chair. The police smelled 
alcohol and Applicant was found to have a blood-alcohol level of .09. (Items 9 and 11.) 
The record does not reflect the disposition of the charge, but Applicant admitted he was 
convicted. In the PSI, he stated that he was required to complete an alcohol-counseling 
program, but he was not fined or jailed. (Item 11 at 3.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR and in the PSI, Applicant stated that he stopped 
consuming alcohol in July 2014. (Item 4 at 4-6; Item 11 at 5.) Between 2004 and 2014, 
his normal consumption was one pint of bourbon each weekend, consumed at home. 
He estimated that he would need to consume two pints during the weekend to reach the 
point of intoxication, which occurred only about three times during 2004-2014. (Item 11 
at 5.) He entered an alcohol-counseling program in July 2014 and completed it in 
December 2014. He was diagnosed with “alcohol intoxication with mild use,” but he was 
not diagnosed as alcohol dependent. The discharge report did not include a prognosis. 
(Item 4 at 10-11.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
 4
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The following disqualifying conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
AG ¶ 22(a) is established by Applicant’s record of alcohol-related arrests, 
charges, and convictions. AG 22(c) is established by Applicant’s three DUI convictions 
and his admission that he routinely consumed a pint of alcohol every weekend for about 
ten years. The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines “binge 
drinking” as “a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration 
(BAC) to 0.08 percent or above,” which typically occurs when a man has five or more 
drinks or a woman has four or more drinks within a two-hour period. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Fact Sheets – Binge Drinking, 
www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-drinking.htm. On at least two instances alleged 
in the SOR, Applicant’s BAC exceeded 0.08. If he consumed a pint of alcohol over a 
weekend, it would amount to at least ten drinks per weekend, which would be sufficient 
to establish binge drinking.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
 
 6
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions are established. All three mitigation 
conditions require a period of abstinence or responsible use. If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In this case, the record is 
inadequate to determine whether Applicant adhered to his intention to abstain from 
alcohol after he submitted his response to the SOR in January 2015, which was only 
about six months after he began abstaining from alcohol. Applicant has not carried his 
burden of establishing mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline G in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a).  Because Applicant requested 
a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to question him 
about his continued abstinence from alcohol or to evaluate his credibility and sincerity 
based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I 
 
 7
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
