 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-02476 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, and mitigate the security concern stemming from his problematic 
financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on December 13, 2012. This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. About three years later on November 2, 2015, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort 
Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
 
2 
 
detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security guideline known as 
Guideline F for financial considerations. He answered the SOR with a two-page 
memorandum on January 22, 2016. He admitted the seven factual allegations without 
explanation and did not submit supporting documentation. He also requested a decision 
based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On March 28, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing.2 The file of relevant material (FORM) 
was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 5, 2016. He has not replied to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me several months later on February 6, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the February 2013 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.3 Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant 
that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a 
waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro 
se applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, which is optional, equates to a knowing 
and voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement. The record does not 
demonstrate that Applicant understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and 
admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood the implications of 
waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 3 is 
inadmissible and I have not considered the information in the ROI.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as a dispatcher for a trucking company. He has worked for this company since 2012. 
This appears to be the first time he has applied for a security clearance. Other than a 
three-month period in 2012, he has had full-time employment since 1990. He married in 
1990 and divorced in 2002. He has two children, both of whom are young adults.  
 
 In his December 2012 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed a 
history of financial problems consisting of seven delinquent accounts.4 He explained 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in 
the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting 
documentation, some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
4 Exhibit 2.  
 
3 
 
that one of the accounts had been paid off and that he was planning on filing bankruptcy 
for the other six accounts.  
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the SOR alleged a history of 
financial problems or difficulties consisting of seven accounts for almost $48,000 in 
delinquent debt. Three debts are for unpaid judgments for about $30,000 in total. Two 
debts are for medical collection accounts in the amounts of $685 and $250. Applicant 
does not dispute his problematic financial history, and it is also established by credit 
reports.5 Applicant did not present any supporting documentation, either in answer to 
the SOR or in response to the FORM, to establish that the delinquent accounts in the 
SOR are paid, settled, in a repayment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise 
resolved in his favor.   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.6 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”7 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.8 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.9 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.10 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.11 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
5 Answer to SOR; Exhibits 4 and 5.  
 
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (no right to a security 
clearance).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
 
4 
 
facts that have been admitted or proven.12 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.13 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.14 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,16 the suitability of an applicant 
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.17 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                                          
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
16 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
17 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. It appears that his 
financial problems are based on an overreliance on credit. With that said, I have given 
very little weight to the two medical collection accounts for $685 and $250 because the 
amounts are minor. Further, it is presumed that the debts were incurred for necessary 
medical care and treatment as opposed to frivolous or irresponsible spending.  
 
 Based on the written record before me, I am unable to credit Applicant in 
extenuation or mitigation. Other than a three-month period in 2012, shortly before he 
began his current job, he has had full-time employment since 1990. He has had ample 
time since submitting his security clearance application in December 2012 to begin the 
process of putting his financial house in good order and have supporting documentation 
to show he has in fact done so. Documentation is necessary because the DOD security-
clearance process, like other large bureaucratic institutions (e.g., banks, insurance 
companies, and universities) does not run on word-of-mouth; it runs on paperwork. The 
nature of the beast is that it is up to the individual applicant to submit relevant 
documentation in support of his case. Here, Applicant has not submitted a single page 
of supporting documentation. Given these circumstances, I can only conclude that the 
three unpaid judgments and two delinquent consumer accounts are unresolved and 
ongoing.  
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems creates doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude 
that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:           Against Applicant 
 
6 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:           Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
