 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-03810 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised 
by his past financial issues. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 15, 2016, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was 
held.2 Applicant testified at the hearing, and Government Exhibits 1 – 5 and Applicant’s 
Exhibits A – L were admitted into the administrative record without objection. Applicant 
timely submitted Exhibit M post-hearing and it was admitted without objection. The 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 27, 2016, and the record 
closed on October 14, 2016.3  
 
SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR allegations can be grouped into three categories: 
 
 First, Applicant incurred a delinquent debt related to his former family home. This 
is the debt referenced in SOR 1.b. Applicant provided documentation showing that he 
paid the debt. 
 
 Second, Applicant incurred debt related to the condo he lived in following his 
separation from his wife. These are the debts referenced in SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g, 
totaling over $85,000. Applicant submitted documentation substantiating his testimony 
that he addressed these debts. He paid the debts or is paying them through an agreed-
upon payment plan with the creditor.  
 
 Third, Applicant incurred other, miscellaneous, consumer-related debt listed at 
SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h – 1.l, totaling about $6,000. He supplied documentation showing 
that he addressed each of the debts. He either paid the debt, is paying the debt, or 
successfully disputed the debt.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 51, served in the U.S. military for over 20 years, receiving an 
honorable discharge upon his retirement from the military in 2003. Since retiring from 
the military, Applicant has been gainfully employed as a federal contractor, except for 
two short periods of time when he was unemployed in 2005 and 2013. This 
unemployment was the result of being fired by his former employers. He has been with 
his current employer for about a year. He earned an associate’s degree in information 
systems management in 2013, and has held a security clearance since about 1983.  
 
 Applicant married in 1985, and separated from his wife in 2009. They have one 
child. Upon separating, Applicant’s wife kept the family home. Applicant states that his 
estranged wife was responsible for paying the mortgage. In 2012, the martial home was 
foreclosed due to nonpayment. Applicant states that he is not liable for any debts 
                                                          
2 Prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearing, and the case management order are attached to the 
record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 At hearing, Department Counsel also submitted a chart summarizing each of the allegations. The chart 
was re-marked and is appended to the record as App. Exh. IV. Department Counsel’s e-mail regarding 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission, Exhibit M, is appended to the record as App. Exh. V.  
 
3 
 
 
associated with the foreclosure, except for a judgment for past-due homeowner’s 
association fees entered against him in 2012. Applicant fully satisfied that judgment in 
2015. Credit reports from 2015 and 2016 do not list any other delinquent accounts 
associated with the foreclosed home. Applicant voluntarily disclosed the foreclosure on 
his recent security clearance application (SCA) and discussed it, as well as his overall 
financial situation, during his clearance interview. This debt is referenced in SOR 1.b.4  
 
 Applicant lost a condominium that he purchased in 2007 to foreclosure in 2014. 
He started having financial problems with the condo almost as soon as he purchased it. 
In 2008, the condo board passed a special assessment for improvements. Applicant’s 
share of the assessment was approximately $40,000. He was unable to pay the 
increased cost associated with the condo, leading to a number of judgments over the 
years, including those referenced in SOR 1.a, a 2014 judgment for $3,400; 1.c, a 2010 
judgment for $2,613; and 1.d, a 2008 judgment for nearly $29,000. Applicant defaulted 
on the mortgage for the condo, which is the $52,000 collection account referenced in 
SOR 1.g. He submitted documentation showing that he satisfied the 2010 and 2014 
judgments in 2016. He also submitted documentation showing that he entered into two 
separate payment plans in January and March 2016 to satisfy any unpaid amounts for 
assessments owed to the condo association and the remaining balance owed on the 
mortgage for the condo. He also submitted documentation reflecting that he made 
payments per the terms of those agreements. He alerted the Government regarding the 
adverse financial information relating to the condo on the SCA and discussed it during 
his clearance interview.5 
 
 Applicant also accrued delinquent accounts for credit card, medical bills, and 
other consumer-related debts. These miscellaneous debts are referenced in SOR 1.e, 
1.f, and 1.h – 1.l, and together total approximately $6,000. Although Applicant did not 
recognize a number of these debts, he submitted documentation reflecting that he 
addressed each of them with the assistance of a credit repair firm. Specifically, he 
provided documentation showing that he satisfied some of the SOR debts, is currently 
paying the credit card debt referenced in SOR 1.k (reducing the past-due balance from 
$3,300 to $705), and successfully disputed or otherwise resolved some other debts.6  
 
 Applicant retained the services of the credit repair firm shortly before the SOR 
was issued. He was in the process of purchasing a home and when he checked his 
credit report came to realize that he had a number of delinquent debts he needed to 
address. With the assistance of the credit repair firm, Applicant addressed his past 
                                                          
4 Tr. 33-34; Exhibits 1, 2, 5, B, I, J, and M; App. Exh. V. The record is silent as to whether Applicant and 
his wife divorced. Applicant did not submit a separation agreement or other document reflecting how the 
marital property, assets, and debts were divided. Although Applicant stated during his clearance interview 
that he did not know where his child lived because there were “money issues” between Applicant and his 
wife, no evidence was submitted showing any delinquency involving a court-ordered support obligation.  
 
5 Tr. 30-33, 34-42, 46-48, 72-73; Exhibits 1, 2, D, and F; App. Exh. V.  
 
6 Tr. 44-46, 48-52, 74-75; Exhibits 1, 2, E, H, G, I, J, and L.  
 
4 
 
 
debts and improved his credit. He recently purchased a home and states that he is 
current on the mortgage.7 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, 
an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations 
and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has 
held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 An individual who is granted access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 52, 76-78; Exhibits H and L.  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is not limited to a consideration of 
whether a prospective or active clearance holder with financial issues might be tempted 
to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It 
also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to such delinquent 
debt cast doubt upon the person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to 
protecting classified information.8 
 
 Applicant started accumulating delinquent debt in around 2008 and, at its peak, 
his delinquent debt totaled over $90,000. This record evidence raises the financial 
considerations security concern and, specifically, the disqualifying conditions listed at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).  
 
 Once a disqualifying condition is established, the burden shifts to an applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. In assessing Applicant’s case, I have considered 
all the available mitigating conditions, including the following:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation was not related to or caused by matters beyond his 
control. Although he separated from his wife in 2009, he was already living beyond his 
means by that point. He started defaulting on his financial obligations in 2008, following 
the special assessment passed by the condo board. His creditors routinely sought 
judgments to force him to pay his debts. This record evidence raised serious questions 
regarding Applicant’s continued suitability for a clearance.  
 
 However, starting in about 2014, Applicant began taking concrete steps to 
address and resolve his delinquent debts. He presented documentation reflecting the 
substantial efforts he made from that point to the present to put his financial house in 
order. Notably, he addressed the major SOR debts totaling about $87,500 that are 
associated with his former marital residence and condominium. He satisfied three of the 
judgments, negotiated payment plans to satisfy the remaining two debts, and made 
payments as agreed. He also resolved or is in the process of resolving the other 
miscellaneous SOR debts, which total about $6,000.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant enlisted the services of a credit repair firm and, with their 
assistance, qualified for a new mortgage, purchased a home, and is current on this new 
mortgage obligation. Therefore, although Applicant’s failure to maintain his finances in 
good stead raised red flags about his continued suitability, his recent track record of 
debt repayment and financial stability denotes positive changes in the manner in which 
he handles his personal financial obligations.  
 
 Individuals applying to attain or maintain a security clearance are not required to 
be debt free nor are they required to manage their personal financial affairs in some 
perfect, unattainable fashion. They are also not required to resolve all past-due debts 
simultaneously or even resolve the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, 
they are expected to present clear, unambiguous evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate 
security concerns raised by their personal circumstances, including circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they 
manage their present finances in a responsible manner.9 This is the heavy burden of 
persuasion that all prospective and active clearance holders must meet before they can 
be granted eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 Here, Applicant met his heavy burden of persuasion. Specifically, I find that AG 
¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply, either in full or in part, and when considered with 
the whole-person factors noted herein, mitigate the security concerns at issue. 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
non-exclusive factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were largely self-made and, although it took 
him longer than one would expect an individual in his position to take to address his 
financial situation, he did so. As of the close of the record, he had addressed each of 
the SOR debts and has not accumulated other delinquent debt in several years.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant voluntarily disclosed the information regarding his past 
financial issues on his SCA and then discussed them during his clearance interview. 
This level of cooperation and candor provides some measure of assurance that the 
Government can continue to entrust him with the responsibility of discharging his 
security obligations, including the duty to disclose potentially adverse information. 
Additionally, in assessing Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and other pertinent character 
traits, I extended favorable consideration to his military service and that he earned a 
college degree while working full time later in life.  
 
 After weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant 
met his heavy burden of persuasion. He mitigated the security concerns at issue and 
established his eligibility for continued access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
