 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02997 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael L. Francisco, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 14, 2016, and requested a hearing. I was 
assigned the case on May 24, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 22, 2016, and I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on August 25, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which I admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s discovery letter was 
marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and offered 
exhibits (AE) A and B, which I admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR (with some 
explanations). I adopt those admissions as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is married and has one adult child from a previous 
relationship. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 2009. 
The record does not contain any information on his educational background. He holds a 
security clearance.1   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant: (1) used Percocet without a prescription from 
approximately December 2012 to approximately September 2014, and sometime in 
January 20162; (2) used marijuana from approximately July 2013 to approximately 
September 2014; (3) attended drug counseling from October 2013 to October 2014, and 
he was diagnosed with opioid abuse; and (4) in approximately April 2000, he failed a 
urinalysis test, given by a former employer, by testing positive for marijuana. 
  
 Applicant began using marijuana when he was 18 years old. He started using it 
sporadically on weekends, but by approximately 1990, he was using marijuana daily. He 
used “all day, every day.” He smoked about one ounce of marijuana a month. When his 
son was born in 1993, he substantially reduced his use of marijuana. In 2000, he failed 
a urinalysis required by his employer and was fired from his job. This event caused him 
to stop using marijuana.3 
 
 In July 2013, Applicant began using marijuana again when his tenant (who rents 
Applicant’s trailer home) gave him some. He regularly used marijuana four to five times 
per month. He smoked it at his home or in his tenant’s home. Applicant claims he 
slowed his marijuana use down to twice per month until he completely stopped using it 
in September 2014. He held a security clearance during this time that he smoked 
                                                          
1 Tr. 21, 23, 49-50; GE 1. 
 
2 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add the January 2016 use, which was based upon 
Applicant’s admission at the hearing. Applicant’s counsel did not object to the motion. I granted the 
motion. See Tr. 56. 
 
3 Tr. 33; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana. Applicant’s tenant remains in that capacity, but Applicant claims the tenant 
no longer uses or gives him marijuana.4  
 
 Applicant began abusing the prescription narcotic Percocet5 when a neighbor 
supplied the drug to him beginning in December 2012. Applicant did not have a 
prescription for Percocet. His use increased until he was using Percocet every 
weekend. From January to March 2014, Applicant took a leave of absence from his job. 
He binged on Percocet taking as many as ten per day. He came back to work in March 
2014 and continued to use the drug three days a week taking five pills per day. He 
claims to have stopped using Percocet in September 2014 when he was required to 
complete a security clearance application (SCA) for his periodic reinvestigation. He no 
longer has contact with his drug-supplying neighbor because he moved and they no 
longer stay in touch. He used Percocet and marijuana together frequently. The reason 
he used Percocet was to relax, not for any pain issues.6 
 
 Applicant reported these earlier uses of marijuana and Percocet to his CEO in 
October 2013 because he knew he would soon have to undergo a periodic 
reinvestigation for his security clearance. The CEO submitted an incident report 
describing Applicant’s drug use and asked Applicant to attend drug counseling. 
Applicant saw a licensed clinical psychologist (Dr. F) about his drug use from October 
2013 to December 2013. Applicant attended three individual sessions during this time. 
Dr. F diagnosed him as an opioid abuser. In 2014, Applicant attended three recovery-
support-group sessions. Applicant completed his SCA in September 2014 and 
underwent his background interview in October 2014. In both his SCA and his interview, 
he stated his intent was never to use prescription drugs again without proper 
authorization. At hearing, Applicant admitted that he used Percocet without a proper 
prescription in January 2016. He obtained the drug from his wife without her permission 
or knowledge. He knew his use was wrong at the time. When asked why he used the 
drug, he stated that he “fell to temptation.”7 
 
 Applicant reported his 2016 abuse of Percocet to his CEO. The CEO testified “it 
broke his heart” to hear about Applicant’s recent drug use. After Applicant’s first 
reported drug use in 2013, the CEO took it upon himself to meet with Applicant 
informally on a regular basis to see how he was doing. During this time, the CEO 
expected Applicant to stay drug free. Applicant and the CEO had worked together for 
about 16 years and the CEO thinks very highly of him. The CEO testified that Applicant 
is an outstanding employee and technically one of the best at what he does. He 
described him as honest and trustworthy. He recommends Applicant retain his security 
                                                          
4 Tr. 25-26; GE 2. 
 
5 Percocet is a Schedule II narcotic under the Controlled Substance Act. See 21 CFR §§ 1308.11-
1308.15. 
 
6 Tr. 23-24, 37-38, 47; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 27-30, 45, 48; GE 1-2, 4; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
clearance despite his drug use. The CEO believed Applicant showed his integrity by 
reporting his drug use.8 
 
 The company president also testified for Applicant (wife of the CEO). She stated 
other employees in the company think highly of Applicant. He has one of the “cleanest” 
employee files in the company. She recommends that he retain his security clearance.9 
 
 Applicant went back to see Dr. F in July 2016. Dr. F provided a letter dated 
August 25, 2016, describing Applicant’s status. No updated diagnosis was stated. He 
stated Applicant attended a recovery support group in August 2016. Applicant testified 
that he is attending Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meetings. He also provided a letter 
stating his intent not to use illegal drugs or abuse prescription drugs. It further stated 
that he committed to automatic revocation of his security clearance upon any future 
violation.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
8 Tr. 59, 63, 73-74, 79. 
 
9 Tr. 82-83, 87, 90. 
 
10 Tr. 44-45; AE A-B. 
 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant testing positive for marijuana when tested by an employer in 2000. 
Between August 2013 and September 2014, Applicant illegally used marijuana on 
multiple occasions. Between December 2012 and September 2014, and in January 
 
6 
 
 
2016, Applicant illegally used Percocet on multiple occasions. In December 2013, a 
licensed clinical psychologist diagnosed Applicant as being opioid dependent. His uses 
during these times occurred while he was holding a security clearance. I find that all the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the drug involvement 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a regular basis between July 2013 and September 
2014. All these uses were when he held a security clearance. He used marijuana after 
he reported such use to his CEO and after he began counseling with Dr. F. His 
extensive history of using marijuana weighs against him even though some amount of 
time has passed since his last use of marijuana. This coupled with his 2016 illegal use 
of Percocet is insufficient attenuation to demonstrate that future use of either drug is 
unlikely to occur. Great doubt is cast upon his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment because of his recent use of Percocet after his CEO went to bat for him, 
after taking part in drug counseling, and after committing to not use illegal drugs in the 
future pursuant to his SCA statement and his statement during his background 
interview. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 His statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future carries little weight 
since he has made similar statements in the past and continued using drugs despite 
those statements. Applicant’s last admitted use of Percocet was in January 2016, which 
is an insufficient period of abstinence under these circumstances, particularly since he 
was undergoing his periodic security review and he held a security clearance when he 
used the drug. He did not establish that recurrence is unlikely. While he apparently has 
abstained from marijuana use for several years and stated he does not intend to use 
drugs in the future, his past actions, particularly his conscious decision to use marijuana 
and Percocet while holding a security clearance, cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. It is too soon to tell whether his use will recur. AG 
¶ 26(b) does not apply.  
 
7 
 
 
 There is insufficient evidence in the record to establish whether Applicant 
competed a prescribed drug treatment plan. The evidence from Dr. F only shows and 
Applicant attended three individual sessions and several group sessions. There is no 
information about a specific treatment plan, and there certainly is no evidence showing 
completion of any plan. Even if there was such a completed program in 2013 to 2014, 
Applicant’s recurrence of Percocet abuse in 2016 is an action that precludes application 
of this mitigating condition. AG ¶ 26(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the supportive 
testimony of Applicant’s CEO and company president, along with Dr. F’s letter of 
support. However, I also considered that he used marijuana and Percocet on multiple 
occasions while holding a security clearance and most recently in January 2016. 
Additionally, he was 45 years old at the time of his last use and was in the process of 
reapplying for a security clearance. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
