 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00262 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, and mitigate the security concern stemming from his illegal drug 
involvement. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on August 4, 2014. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. About one year later on November 30, 2015, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort 
Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
 
2 
 
detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security guideline known as 
Guideline H for drug involvement. He answered the SOR on January 5, 2016. He 
admitted the two factual allegations and requested a decision based on the written 
record lieu of a hearing.   
 
On April 4, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing.2 The file of relevant material (FORM) 
was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 14, 2016. He has not replied to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me several months later on February 6, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 5, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the November 2014 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.3 Furthermore, the Directive provides no exception for the authentication 
requirement. Although Applicant did not reply to the FORM, I am not persuaded that a 
pro se applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, which is optional, equates to a 
knowing and voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement. The record does not 
demonstrate that Applicant understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and 
admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood the implications of 
waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 5 is 
inadmissible and I have not considered the information in the ROI.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as a desktop-support technician for an engineering company. He has worked for this 
company since June 2014. Before that, he was unemployed for about two months in 
May-June 2014. And before that, he was had a job in computer support for a large, well-
known defense contractor from July 2004 to May 2013. He applied for and obtained a 
security at the secret level in 2003.4 He has been married and divorced three times. He 
has one minor child.   
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in 
the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting 
documentation, some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
4 Exhibit 7.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s admits engaging in drug-related criminal conduct, which took place in 
2012 while he had his job with a defense contractor. In particular, he was arrested and 
charged with possession of marijuana (less than 20 grams) and use or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.5 He self-reported the drug-related incident to his then employer. 
Subsequently in 2013, he pleaded no contest, and the state court imposed a fine of 
$533 and ordered him to attend a victim-awareness program.  
 
 Applicant also disclosed his drug-related behavior when he completed his 2014 
security clearance application.6 He reported using marijuana in November 2012 while 
possessing a security clearance. He explained that he was under stress because he 
was going through a divorce; he was also undergoing an incident of credit-card fraud in 
the amount of $5,000; and he was discontent over the Thanksgiving holiday. He 
explained that he smoked marijuana with a friend and was given the pipe. He was 
pulled over by the police on his drive home and the pipe formed the basis for the 
criminal charges. He also disclosed the details about the criminal charges and the 
disposition thereof. He stated that the possession of marijuana charge was nolle 
prossed, and adjudication of guilt was withheld on the use or possession of drug 
paraphernalia charge.  
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR allegations was limited to an admission without 
further comment, explanation, or supporting documentation. Likewise, he did not reply 
to the FORM. As a result, the record does not contain information concerning his 
employment record, constructive community involvement, drug counseling or treatment, 
or other matters indicative of reform and rehabilitation.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”8 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.9 An 
                                                          
5 Exhibit 8.  
 
6 Exhibit 4. 
 
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (no right to a security 
clearance).  
 
8 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
 
4 
 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.10 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.11 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.12 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.13 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.14 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.15 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16 
 
Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline H for drug involvement, the concern is that “use of an illegal 
drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about a [person’s] reliability 
and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.”17 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse; 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; 
 
AG ¶ 25(g) any illegal drug abuse after being granted a security 
clearance;  
                                                          
10 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
15 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
17 AG ¶ 24.  
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the [person’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s illegal drug involvement that occurred 
in 2012, including the resulting criminal charges and the disposition thereof. The most 
troubling aspect of this case is Applicant’s choice to use marijuana after being granted a 
security clearance. That is serious misconduct, and it needs to be weighed accordingly. 
Other than the passage of time without evidence of recurrence, Applicant has presented 
scant evidence of reform and rehabilitation. Based on the written record before me, 
Applicant has not demonstrated that he will not abuse drugs in the future.  
 
 Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement after being granted a security 
clearance creates serious doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, 
and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:           Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
