 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08631 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzleman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s spouse has strong connections to Russia. She is a citizen of Russia; 
she travels to Russia almost every year; she stays in Russia for two or three months; 
she uses her Russian passport; and she visits and frequently communicates with her 
aging parents and one of her sons residing in Russia. Russia aggressively seeks 
classified and sensitive information from the United States and might use Applicant’s 
spouse, her son, or her parents to put pressure on Applicant in an attempt to 
compromise classified or sensitive information. Foreign influence security concerns are 
not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 24, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On July 13, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
On July 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On September 29, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. 
On October 6, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On November 18, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for 
December 8, 2016. (HE 1) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, 
time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 6-7) The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, the Government provided two exhibits; Applicant offered nine exhibits; and all 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 18-22; GE 1-2; Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A-I) On December 16, 2016, I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.).    
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel offered 16 exhibits for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Russia. (Tr. 18-
20; HE 4; Source Documents I-XVI) I have also incorporated information from the U.S. 
Department of State website, Background Notes Russia for some basic, well-known 
information about Russia such as population and diplomatic agreements with the United 
States to ensure the record contained some positive information about Russia’s 
relationship with the United States. See note 2 infra. I have also incorporated various 
provisions mostly verbatim from Department Counsel’s summary without attribution, 
quotation marks, and footnotes in the section labeled Russian Federation, infra.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative 
notice of the proffered documents, and Department Counsel’s request is granted.     
     
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and he provided 
explanations and mitigating information. (HE 2) His admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a 55-year-old system security engineer, who is employed by a 
government contractor. (Tr. 8, 15, 23; GE 1; GE 2; SOR response) Applicant was born 
in the United States. (Tr. 15) In 1979, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 8) In 2005, he 
received a bachelor’s degree in computer science. (Tr. 9) He has taken several courses 
towards a master’s degree. (Tr. 9) He holds numerous professional information 
technology certifications. (Tr. 24) His resume provides a detailed description of his 
extensive information technology experience. (AE D)  
 
In 1984, he married, and in 1991, he divorced. (Tr. 9, 24) In 2000, he married. 
(Tr. 9) He does not have any children. (Tr. 9) He has one brother and one sister who 
live in the United States and are U.S. citizens. (Tr. 23) 
 
In 1980, Applicant joined the U.S. Air Force (AF), and he honorably retired as a 
technical sergeant (E-6) in 2000. (Tr. 10) He was promotable to master sergeant (E-7) 
when he elected to retire from the AF. (Tr. 52) From 2000 to 2007, he worked for a DOD 
agency. (Tr. 26) For 22 months from 2007 to 2008, he was deployed to Iraq as a DOD 
contractor. (Tr. 26, 50-51) Since 1980, he has held a security clearance, and there is no 
evidence of any security violations. (Tr. 16, 27) 
 
In 1960, Applicant’s spouse was born in Russia. (Tr. 16; GE 1) In 1998, Applicant 
first communicated with his spouse over the Internet, and in 1999, he physically met 
her. (Tr. 40-41) He notified the AF Office of Special Investigations (OSI) about his 
relationship with his future spouse. (Tr. 41) She has resided in the United States since 
2000. (Tr. 16, 43) In 2007, Applicant’s spouse became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 16, 28) His 
spouse’s annual income as a self-employed artist is about $13,000. (Tr. 44) One of 
Applicant’s spouse’s sons, E, resides in the United States and, in 2008, he became a 
U.S. citizen. (Tr. 16, 28) Applicant’s spouse and E both currently reside in the United 
States; however, they have maintained their Russian citizenships. (Tr. 16, 28) E is 
married, and E’s spouse resides in the United States. (Tr. 28) E most recently visited 
Russia in July 2016. (Tr. 28)  
 
Applicant’s spouse’s other son, S, lives in Russia, is married, is a citizen of 
Russia, and has one daughter. (Tr. 24) S is a low-level employee of a law enforcement 
entity for a state in Russia. (Tr. 28, 33, 52) S began the process of emigrating from 
Russia to the United States. (Tr. 28) S and his spouse obtained U.S. permanent 
resident cards; however, they elected to return to Russia. (Tr. 28) Applicant’s spouse 
communicates with S about once a week. (Tr. 45) Applicant’s spouse visits S when she 
goes to Russia. (Tr. 46)     
 
In 1993, Applicant’s spouse purchased an apartment in Russia that is now 
valued at about $13,000. (Tr. 27, 39) Applicant’s spouse lives in the apartment when 
she visits Russia. (Tr. 27) She rents her apartment in Russia when she is in the United 
States. (Tr. 27) She has $3,000 to $4,000 in a Russian bank account. 2 (Tr. 39, 44) 
                                            
2Applicant’s SOR does not allege four issues of security significance: (1) his spouse has retained 
and actively uses a Russian passport; (2) his spouse visits Russia almost every year; (3) his spouse stays 
in Russia two to three months each year; and (4) his spouse has a Russian bank account. In ISCR Case 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are about 87 years old, and they are citizens 
and residents of Russia. (Tr. 27, 29) The Russian Government did not employ 
Applicant’s parents-in-law, and they are currently retired. (Tr. 33) Applicant’s spouse 
communicates with her parents about three times a week. (Tr. 45) Applicant’s spouse 
visits her parents about once a year, and she stays in her apartment for her visits, which 
are two to three months in duration. (Tr. 27, 43) Applicant’s apartment is in fairly close 
proximity to her parents’ residence in Russia. (Tr. 44) Applicant partially funds his 
spouse’s visits to Russia. (Tr. 44) His spouse’s maintenance of her Russian citizenship 
obviates the necessity of obtaining a Russian Visa when she is visiting and living in 
Russia because she uses her Russian passport. (Tr. 27, 36, 49) Applicant anticipates 
that his spouse will continue to visit her parents in Russia, and he “would never ask her 
not to do that.” (Tr. 50)   
 
In 2000, and 2008, Applicant traveled to Russia and visited his parents-in-law. 
(Tr. 29, 31, 36) Applicant rarely speaks to his parents-in-law and only when his spouse 
communicates with them using Skype. (Tr. 29, 36) He does not communicate with S. 
(Tr. 32) Applicant does not speak Russian, and his parents-in-law do not speak English. 
(Tr. 29, 36) Applicant’s parents-in-law receive about $200 monthly in retirement from the 
Russian Government, and in 2014, Applicant voluntarily paid $25,000 to purchase an 
apartment they could rent in Russia for additional income. (Tr. 30, 36-37, 52) In 2014, 
Applicant borrowed $25,000 to purchase the apartment in Russia, and his monthly 
payment is $500. (Tr. 40, 47) His parents-in-law now have about $400 monthly in 
income. (Tr. 30) Applicant anticipates that his spouse and her sister will inherit their 
parents’ apartment. (Tr. 48) He has not continued to provide financial support to his 
family in Russia, and he does not intend to provide financial assistance to them in the 
future. (Tr. 30, 32) 
 
Applicant provides financial support to his family residing in the United States, 
and he has significant financial connections to the United States. (Tr. 27) His annual 
income is about $95,000. (Tr. 37) He owns a home in the United States valued at 
$175,000 with a mortgage of $126,000 and four vehicles. (Tr. 37; AE G) His 
approximate net worth is about $225,000. (Tr. 39-40) 
 
Applicant denied that he has any loyalty or obligation to Russia. (Tr. 30) He does 
not have any direct relationships with anyone living in Russia. (Tr. 31) He would report 
any improper contacts, pressure, or efforts by a foreign power to cause him to 
                                                                                                                                            
No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct 
not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 
14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
These four allegations will not be considered except for the five purposes listed above.  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
compromise classified information to the proper authorities. (Tr. 37-38) Applicant 
believes his security clearance was properly adjudicated and approved in 2004 and 
2009, with all the same information about his connections to Russia that is currently 
being considered. (Tr. 38; SOR response)    
 
Character Evidence 
 
 A coworker and neighbor of Applicant is a retired AF colonel who has held a 
security clearance for 43 years, and he has known Applicant and his spouse for 15 
years. (Tr. 54-59; AE C) Another coworker, who held a security clearance for 35 years, 
retired from the AF after 22 years of active service, and he has known Applicant for 18 
years. (Tr. 64-65; AE H; AE I) A friend has known Applicant for 16 years and held a 
security clearance for 22 years. (AE A) His supervisor has known Applicant since June 
2016 and held a security clearance for 42 years. (AE B) The general sense of their four 
statements is that Applicant is trustworthy, professional, honest, reliable, responsible, 
serious, and dedicated to mission accomplishment. They recommended continuation of 
Applicant’s security clearance. (Tr. 55-71; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE H; AE I)  
 
 Applicant received the following medals and awards during his AF service: AF 
Achievement Medal with two Bronze Oak Leaf Clusters (BOLC); AF Outstanding Unit 
Award with two BOLCs; AF Good Conduct Medal with four BOLCs; National Defense 
Service Medal; AF Overseas Short Tour Ribbon; AF Overseas Long Tour Ribbon with 
two BOLCs; AF Longevity Service Award Ribbon with three BOLCs; NCO Professional 
Military Education Graduate Ribbon with one BOLC; Small Arms Expert Marksmanship 
Ribbon; and AF Training Ribbon. (AE E) He also completed numerous military training 
courses. (AE E) In July 2015, he received a certificate of appreciation from a wing 
commander. (AE F) 
    
Russian Federation3 
 
Russia is a vast and diverse federation with a total population of about 140 
million. Russia achieved independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 
August 1991. Russia inherited the Soviet Union’s permanent seat on the United Nations 
Security Council, most of its military assets, and the bulk of its foreign assets, and its 
debts. Russia retained a powerful military and remains a nuclear superpower. Russian 
political power is concentrated in the executive branch, primarily in the president and 
prime minister. Its weak multiparty political system is dominated by the pro-government 
United Russia party and a bicameral legislature consisting of the State Duma (lower 
house) and Federation Council (upper house). 
 
Russia has an uneven human rights record. The December 2011 parliamentary 
elections were criticized by international observers for government interference, 
manipulation, and electoral irregularities. In March 2012, President Putin was selected 
                                            
3In addition to the materials cited in Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice, some 
facts discussing positive aspects of the relationship between Russia and the United States are from the 
Department of State, Background Notes Russia (April 30, 2009), available at 
http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/russia/143281.htm.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
for a third term, after already serving the constitutional maximum of two consecutive 
terms. Russia has a recent history of political persecution of individuals who threatened 
powerful state or business interests. While there was free expression on the Internet 
and in some print and electronic media, self-censorship and the government’s 
ownership of and pressure on some outlets limited public discourse.  
 
Russian law forbids entry to private residences except in cases prescribed by 
federal law. Government monitoring of correspondence, telephone conversations, or 
other means of communication without a warrant and collection, storage, utilization, and 
dissemination of information about a person’s private life without consent are also 
prohibited. Russia suffers from a weak judiciary, widespread corruption, physical abuse, 
violence against women and children, unauthorized electronic surveillance and entry of 
private residences, and restrictions on the right to free assembly.  
 
United States citizens traveling in Russia may be subject to indiscriminate acts of 
terror in Russia. Russian human rights abuses in the Chechen conflict include torture, 
summary executions, use of indiscriminate force, and arbitrary detentions. In addition to 
problematic behavior in the Chechen conflict, Russian authorities engage in arbitrary 
arrest and detention as well as torture and abuse to obtain confessions. Widespread 
government corruption, harsh prison conditions, and endemic crime are significant 
Russian problems. The Russian legislature has passed a series of reforms in Russian 
criminal procedural laws, making their law more consistent with Western standards. 
Russian human rights performance has improved in some areas.  
 
In 2016, the leading state intelligence threats to U.S. interests were Russia and 
China, based on their capabilities, intent, and broad operational scope. Russia inherited 
a significant intelligence capability from the former Soviet Union, and continues to focus, 
with increasing sophistication, on collecting sensitive and protected U.S. technologies 
through its intelligence services. Russia has an active, ongoing collection program 
targeting sensitive U.S. industrial and military technology as well as commercial and 
dual-use technology. Russia also targets national security and signal intelligence. 
Russia is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and 
technology, using human intelligence, cyber, and other operations.  
 
In June 2010, ten Russian Intelligence Service secret agents were arrested for 
carrying out deep-cover assignments for Russia in the United States. In July 2010, all 
ten pleaded guilty to conspiracy to act as an agent of a foreign government, and they 
were expelled from the United States. In January 2011, a convicted spy and former U.S. 
Central Intelligence Agency employee was sentenced to an additional 96 months in 
prison after pleading guilty to conspiracy to act as an agent of a foreign government and 
conspiracy to commit international money laundering. He passed information to the 
Russian government in exchange for money between 2006 and 2008.4 Department 
Counsel’s administrative notice request details additional Russian violations of the laws 
of the United States involving collection of sensitive and classified information.   
 
                                            
4There is no evidence that Applicant, his spouse, or her family in Russia are involved in or 
connected with any criminal activity on behalf of Russia.  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The U.S. Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive reports a possible 
increase in Russian collection over the next several years because of the many Russian 
immigrants with advanced technical skills working for leading U.S. companies who may 
be targeted for recruitment by Russian intelligence services. Russia’s increasing 
economic integration with the West is seen as likely to lead to a great number of 
Russian companies affiliated with the intelligence services, often through employing 
ostensibly retired intelligence officers, doing business with the United States. Beyond 
collection activities and espionage directed at the United States, Russia has provided 
various military and missile technologies to other countries of security concern, 
including China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. 
 
In March 2014, Russia attempted to annex sovereign Ukrainian territory. Russia 
previously seized the Crimean Peninsula. The United States does not recognize 
Russia’s attempted annexations and has called on President Putin to end this 
occupation and withdraw his forces. In March 2016, the United States reaffirmed its 
commitment to a united sovereign Ukraine.  
 
Russia and the United States are occasionally aligned on political initiatives and 
have joined in numerous international agreements, including efforts to resolve 
international political problems at the United Nations. For example, the United States 
and Russia entered into a bilateral World Trade Organization accession agreement in 
2006. Russia imports U.S. goods valued at several billion dollars. Russia and United 
States are allies in the war on terrorism, and both seek to suppress the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction. Both countries have emphasized the reduction of 
strategic arsenals. The United States has spent billions of dollars in “Nunn-Lugar” funds 
and related programs to assist Russia with dismantling nuclear weapons and ensuring 
security of its nuclear weapons, weapons grade material, and other weapons of mass 
destruction. Russia has attempted to use its significant oil and gas exports as sources 
of political influence. In July 2009, President Obama and then Russian President 
Medvedev established a Bilateral Presidential Commission dedicated to improving 
coordination between the two countries, identifying areas of cooperation, and pursuing 
joint projects that strengthen strategic stability, international security, economic well-
being, and the development of ties between the Russian and American people.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
  
Applicant is credited with refuting SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant has decided not to 
provide any additional financial support to his parents-in-law living in Russia.  
 
Applicant does not have frequent contact with anyone who is a citizen and 
permanent resident of Russia; however, he shares living quarters with his spouse, and 
his relationship with her “creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.” His spouse has frequent contact5 with her parents and S, who 
are citizens and residents of Russia. Her frequent contacts with her family are a 
manifestation of her care and concern for her relatives living in Russia.  
                                            
5The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent).     
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Russia because of 
terrorists and the activities of the Russian Government. The mere possession of close 
family ties with one or more family members living in Russia, is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship with 
even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Applicant lives with his spouse when she is not visiting Russia. She maintains a 
close relationship with her parents and S, who are residents and citizens of Russia. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to 
his spouse, and she has ties of affection to her parents and S, who are citizens and 
residents of Russia. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged is counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Russia with the United States, 
places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his spouse’s relationships with her family members living in Russia do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his 
spouse and her family living in Russia.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Russia 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Russia has a problem with terrorism. 
However, the primary concern relates to the activities of Russian intelligence operatives. 
Applicant’s spouse’s relationships with relatives living in Russia create a potential 
conflict of interest because terrorists or Russian intelligence agents could place 
pressure on Applicant’s spouse, her parents, or S living in Russia in an effort to cause 
Applicant to compromise classified information. These relationships create “a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 
7(d). Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s spouse’s 
contacts with her family in Russia and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant provided important 
mitigating information. He has substantial connections to the United States. He was 
born and educated in the United States. He honorably retired from the AF. He received 
awards and medals from the AF. He served 22 months in Iraq as a DOD contractor. He 
has held a security clearance since 1980 without any security violations. He has 
substantial financial connections to the United States. He has one brother and one 
sister who live in the United States and are U.S. citizens. He has shown his patriotism, 
loyalty, and fidelity to the United States during his years of support to DOD.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his spouse and his spouse’s 
relationships with her relatives who are citizens and residents of Russia. Applicant’s 
spouse was born in Russia. She resided in Russia for the first 39 years of her life. She 
has resided in the United States since 2000, and in 2007, she became a U.S. citizen. 
She is a citizen of Russia, and she travels to Russia almost every year. She stays in 
Russia for two or three months. She uses her Russian passport, and she visits her 
aging parents and S, who are citizens and residents of Russia. She communicates 
frequently with her parents and son in Russia. Applicant through his spouse and her 
relatives living in Russia are potential targets of terrorists and Russian intelligence 
agents. Applicant’s continued access to classified information could theoretically add 
risk to his spouse and her relatives living in Russia.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to the United States are important; however, 
they are insufficient to mitigate concerns over his connections to his spouse and her 
connections to Russia. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are not mitigated.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):   
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
Applicant is a 55-year-old system security engineer, who is employed by a 
government contractor. He was born and educated in the United States. He holds 
numerous professional information technology certifications. His resume provides a 
detailed description of his extensive information technology experience.   
 
Applicant joined the AF in 1980, and he honorably retired as a technical sergeant 
in 2000. From 2000 to 2007, he worked for a DOD agency, and for 22 months from 
2007 to 2008, he deployed to Iraq as a DOD contractor. He has one brother and one 
sister who live in the United States and are U.S. citizens. He has held a security 
clearance since 1980, and there is no evidence of any security violations. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, 
or committed any security violations. 
 
Four friends and coworkers provided character evidence supporting continuation 
of Applicant’s security clearance. The general sense of their statements is that Applicant 
is trustworthy, professional, honest, reliable, responsible, serious, and dedicated to 
mission accomplishment. They recommended continuation of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant received medals and awards during his AF service, and he 
received a certificate of achievement after his AF retirement.  
 
In 1960, Applicant’s spouse was born in Russia. In 2000, she married Applicant, 
and she emigrated from Russia to the United States. Applicant notified the AF OSI of 
his relationship with her. In 2007, she became a U.S. citizen, and she took an oath of 
allegiance to the United States. One of Applicant’s spouse’s sons, E, resides in the 
United States and, in 2008, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse has maintained her 
Russian citizenship.  
 
Applicant’s spouse travels to Russia almost every year. She stays in Russia for 
two or three months in her apartment. She uses her Russian passport to visit Russia. 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
She visits her aging parents and one of her sons in Russia. Her parents receive a 
pension from the Russian Government of about $200 monthly, and the Russian 
Government could terminate that pension to put pressure on her parents. She 
communicates frequently with her parents and son in Russia. S is a low-level employee 
of a law enforcement entity for a state in Russia.   
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Russia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.6 Russia aggressively seeks classified and 
sensitive information from the United States. Russia has an effective intelligence 
apparatus. Russia is a superpower with a powerful military and nuclear weapons. 
Russia has violated international norms and has ongoing disputes with the United 
States relating to Russia’s military and diplomatic actions in the Ukraine, the Crimea, 
and Syria. The Russian Government does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect 
civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Russian Governments are allies 
in the war on terrorism and over the years have made several important diplomatic 
agreements. Because of Russia’s diplomatic and military rivalry with the United States 
in several areas and aggressive intelligence targeting of the United States, there is a 
“heightened risk” that Russia will attempt to pressure Applicant through his spouse, his 
parents-in-law, and S, who are vulnerable to Russian intelligence operatives.          
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude foreign influence concerns are not mitigated, and eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion).  
