KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  The Judge’s material findings are
supported by substantial evidence.  Ineffective assistance of counsel is not applicable in a DOHA
proceeding.  Applicant did not rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  Applicant provided no reason to believe that the transcript contained
errors that distorted his testimony or affected the outcome of the case.  Adverse decision
affirmed.  
CASE NO: 15-02040.a1
DATE: 02/16/2017
DATE: February 16, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-02040
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 17, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On November 22, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Stephanie Hess denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings contained
errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
In essence, Applicant’s financial problems involved a real estate business that he and his wife
operated.  Pursuant to this enterprise, he purchased a home and rented it out.  However, he missed
some mortgage payments, and the house was the subject of a foreclosure sale in 2007.  He purchased
another home for over $400,000 by means of an adjustable rate mortgage and took out a home equity
loan as well.  He sought to modify the loan, but his efforts were not successful.  He also established
a real estate management company to manage one rental room in his home.  He rented it to his
mother, who did not make payments while she was deployed overseas.  Applicant was eventually
granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge.  In addition, Applicant calculated his business taxes
improperly, and he and his wife did not have taxes withheld from their paychecks from 2009 until
2011.  As of November 2015, Applicant owed over $26,000 in Federal taxes and nearly $20,000 to
his state.  Applicant has received favorable performance evaluations at his job, receiving awards in
2009 and 2014.  He is considered trustworthy and committed to security.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s problems had not originated from circumstances
outside his control and that he had not acted responsibly in regard to them.  She cited to evidence
that Applicant was delinquent in Federal and state taxes, that he had defaulted on two mortgage
loans and a home equity loan, and had over $8,000 in credit card debt charged off.  She stated that
there is no evidence to show that Applicant’s finances are under control.  Though noting installment
plans for his tax obligations, she stated that Applicant had undertaken no action until after an IRS
audit.  She concluded that Applicant’s financial problems were recent and were incurred under
circumstances that cast doubt on his security worthiness.  The Judge stated that Applicant had
provided no plausible explanation for why he was not able to make his mortgage payments or what
happened with the funds that should have been spent on them.  
Discussion
Much of Applicant’s appeal presentation consists of matters from outside the record.  We
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3. 1.29.  Applicant challenges several of the
Judge’s findings.  After considering the evidence as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s material
findings are supported by substantial evidence.  Applicant has not pointed to any harmful error in
the Decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01285 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 2016).  Applicant states
that his attorney did not submit all of the evidence that he expected her to.  The ineffective
assistance of counsel doctrine is not applicable in a DOHA proceeding.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
10-06703 at 2 (App. Bd. May 4, 2012).  Applicant cites to his efforts to improve his financial
situation, his having held a clearance for many years without incident or concern, etc.  Applicant has
not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g.,
2
ISCR Case No. 15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2016).   Neither has he shown that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).  Applicant argues that the hearing room had poor
acoustics and the transcript contains errors.  He provides selections from the transcript that he has
annotated with corrections.  A review of the transcript discloses no reference to any acoustical
problems that had a harmful effect on Applicant’s ability to present his case.  Applicant has provided
no reason to believe that the transcript contains errors that distorted his testimony or affected the
outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04186 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2015).    
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
