 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01317 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
March 7, 2013. On September 14, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 
C.F.R. ¶ 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 8, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on August 23, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 3, 
2016. The case was previously assigned to another administrative judge who was 
unable to hear it on the date scheduled. I was substituted and convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 12, 2016. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit documentary information. She submitted AE A 
through E,3 which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts and a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1999, 
which was dismissed the same year. Applicant admitted all the allegations with 
explanations and one account disputed.4 Her admissions in her answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old and has been employed by a government contractor 
since August 2016, and is seeking to renew her security clearance. She previously 
worked for another government contractor from August 2015 to August 2016. She 
married in 2003 and separated in 2009. She previously married in 1989 and divorced in 
1998. She has three adult children. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in 1999, but the case was dismissed 
because Applicant did not follow through with the repayment plan. She claimed about 
$113,000 in liabilities, and her home was foreclosed and sold in a short sale.  
 
 She again filed Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in July 2015, and the plan was approved 
in January 2016. Her plan base is $74,876, and at last notice, she paid $9,854 into the 
plan. As of March 2016, she was required to pay $500 per month for eight months, then 
$1,363 per month for the remaining 52 months. Applicant testified that she has been 
making payments since October 2015, but missed payments in September 2016 
(hearing held in October 2016) and had not paid the October 2016 installment as of the 
hearing. Her post-hearing submission appears to show missed payments in September 
(for nonsufficient funds), October, and November 2015, and January 2016. The last 
payment of record was August 2016.5 In addition to the SOR debts, Applicant testified 
that she is delinquent on 2015 state income taxes. They have been included in her 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, along with delinquent student loans. 
                                                     
3 Applicant’s post-hearing submission consisted of: (A) Memo with list of documents and copy of Notice of 
Hearing; (B) Personal Monthly Budget; (C) Bankruptcy Court documents (incomplete filing) and mortgage 
statement; (D) Annotated SOR; (E) Portion of a credit report (index and summary pages 1 and 2 of 133). 
    
4 Answer. Note, in several responses in Applicant’s Answer, she noted that she is “working to make 
payment of my Credit with a Debt Consolidation.” In testimony, she explained that she was referring to 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and that she has never used a debt consolidation service. 
 
5 AE C. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s actions with respect to the SOR allegations and the current status are 
noted below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Filed Chapter 13 
Bankruptcy in 1999 
Admitted. Applicant did not 
follow through with plan. 
Action dismissed in 1999.   
Chapter 13 dismissed. 
1.b Phone utility debt for 
$2,885 
Claims disputed debt but 
that she owes a smaller 
amount that may be 
included in Chapter 13. 
No evidence of dispute or 
other resolution. Not 
resolved. 
1.c Cell phone utility debt 
for $1,953 
Applicant believes account 
paid in 2014 or 2015. 
No evidence of payment or 
resolution provided. Not 
resolved. 
1.d Phone utility debt for 
$1,858 
Claims duplicate of 1.b, but 
Credit Bureau Report (CBR) 
account numbers are 
different. 
No evidence of duplicate or 
resolution provided. Not 
resolved. 
1.e Consumer collection for 
$470 
Included in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. 
Verified included in Chapter 
13. 
1.f. Cable debt for $420 Claims debt for unreturned 
equipment.  
No evidence provided that 
equipment returned or other 
resolution. Not resolved. 
1.g Consumer collection for 
$326 
Included in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. 
Verified included in Chapter 
13. 
1.h Medical collection for 
$166 
Testified that she made 
arrangements to resolve 
medical debts prior to filing 
bankruptcy.   
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
1.i Medical collection for 
$50 
Claimed in Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) that paid 
collection. Testified that she 
made arrangements to 
resolve medical debts prior 
to filing bankruptcy. Post-
hearing claimed in Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
 
4 
 
1.j Consumer account 
charged off for $48 
Included in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. 
Verified included in Chapter 
13. 
1.k Medical collection for 
$43 
Claimed in Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) that paid 
collection. Testified that she 
made arrangements to 
resolve medical debts prior 
to filing bankruptcy.  Post-
hearing claimed in Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt. Not resolved. 
1.l Credit charge off for 
$16,281 
Vehicle repossession in 
2015. No payment of 
deficiency. Claims account 
is closed. Wants to amend 
Chapter 13 to include debt. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
1.m Insurance judgment for 
$4,845 
Included in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. 
Verified included in Chapter 
13. 
1.n Credit collection for 
$1,230 
Claimed intended to resolve 
or include in Chapter 13. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
1.o Credit collection for 
$2,115 
Claims in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
1.p Credit collection for 
$1,192 
Claimed intended to resolve 
or include in Chapter 13. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
1.q Credit collection for 
$250  
Claimed in PSI that 
collection was paid. Then 
testified that she intended to 
resolve or include in 
Chapter 13. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or inclusion in Chapter 
13. Not resolved. 
 
 Applicant states she earns about $100,000 per year in her current job. The 
undated budget she provided (AE B) shows a $555 per month net remainder. However, 
she testified that she had a negative net remainder for three months before beginning 
her current employment. She stated that in September 2016, she was able to meet her 
monthly expenses, but had nothing left over. She currently has about $10 in a checking 
account, no savings, and about $600-$700 in a 401k account after she withdrew 
$20,000 to $30,000, to use in part to assist her mother to pay her mortgage. 
 
 Applicant purchased her current home in 2006, but fell behind on her mortgage 
payments in 2010. She completed modifications to her mortgage, the last in 2013, but 
 
5 
 
continued to fall behind in payments. In 2014 she was in an accident, and recovered 
about $9,000, which was used to repair her home, but not pay the mortgage. She has 
not received formal financial counseling other than the minimal counseling required 
before filing bankruptcy. Her current home mortgage and student loans are included in 
her Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  
  
 The summary portion of the report she provided (AE E) alludes to three to five 
collection accounts, but the detailed account listings were not provided. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.6 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, EO 10865, and the 
                                                     
6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
 
6 
 
Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.8 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, SOR 
response, PSI, statement, and bankruptcy documents. Applicant incurred longstanding 
delinquent debts, many that have gone unresolved. She filed Chapter 13 Bankruptcy 
and began making payments in October 2015, but she has missed payments and all of 
her delinquent debts were not included in the bankruptcy. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (b) as disqualifying conditions. 
                                                     
8 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s responses to the SOR, PSI, and testimony were largely inconsistent. 
Her various statements about her past efforts to resolve her debts show, at a minimum, 
a lack of fundamental understanding of her financial circumstances. I am left with a 
muddled picture of the extent actions were taken to resolve the majority of the SOR 
debts. 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some 
important positive financial information. Applicant was unemployed for about three 
months in 2006, and again in 2010. She claims the 2010 period of unemployment and 
subsequent underemployment marked the beginning of her current financial problems, 
including her mortgage delinquency and inability to pay student loans. She is currently 
separated from her spouse. These are factors largely beyond her control. Applicant 
made efforts to renegotiate her current mortgage and, in 2015, filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, in which she has begun payments under the plan. 
 
However, Applicant allowed her debts to remain unresolved for many years after 
an unsuccessful Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1999. Her financial problems continued, her 
home was foreclosed, and she filed bankruptcy again in 2015. She included some of 
her SOR debts, her delinquent mortgage, taxes and student loans, but not all of the 
debts listed in the SOR. She provided scant evidence of the current Chapter 13 filing, 
and only two pages of her current credit bureau report. The summary portion of the 
report she provided alludes to three to five collection accounts, but the detailed account 
listing was not provided. 
 
 Applicant testified that she has been making payments on her Chapter 13 plan 
since October 2015, but missed payments in September 2016 (hearing held in October 
 
8 
 
2016) and had not paid the October 2016 installment as of the hearing date. Her post-
hearing submission appears to show missed payments in September (for nonsufficient 
funds), October, and November 2015, and January 2016. The last payment of record 
was August 2016. In addition to the SOR debts, Applicant testified that she is delinquent 
on her 2015 state income taxes and student loans. They have been included in her 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. She has not shown evidence of good-faith efforts to 
resolve the remaining debts, nor has she established a financial track record to show 
similar issues are unlikely to recur.  
 
 Her financial problems have been longstanding, and remain recent and ongoing. 
There is no evidence of completed financial counseling except for pre-bankruptcy 
counseling presumably required before she could file a petition. There is no evidence 
that Applicant’s financial problems are under control, that she has the intention or ability 
to address her remaining delinquent debts, or that she has the means and intent to 
remain financially solvent in the future.  
 
 Applicant’s use of the bankruptcy court to address her debts as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a is not disqualifying, however her failure to follow through with the plan resulting in 
dismissal of the action reflects an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations 
and overall financial irresponsibility. Her current bankruptcy shows an effort to resolve 
her financial problems through a legal means, however she has not shown that all of her 
debts were included and that she has made consistent payments toward her plan 
obligations. 
 
 Although mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies as Applicant faced 
conditions beyond her control that contributed to her current financial predicament, she 
has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant also received financial 
counseling per the bankruptcy court requirements. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies, however 
there is insufficient evidence that her financial problems are under control. The 
remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable. Her overall financial irresponsibility 
and her current precarious financial condition cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Her efforts to resolve her debts prior to bankruptcy, 
and the failure to include the remaining SOR debts show that her financial 
circumstances are not fully under control. I also find that her current financial status 
does not demonstrate an ability to meet future financial obligations. Based on her 
current financial condition, I believe that financial delinquencies may reoccur in the 
future. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant has not resolved the majority of her delinquent debts. She attempted 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1999 but did not follow through. She gave conflicting and 
unsubstantiated information about her efforts to resolve debts. She successfully refiled 
bankruptcy in 2015, but has not made consistent payments as required under the plan. 
Other debts were not shown to be included in the bankruptcy, and her current CBR 
shows continued collection accounts. Finally, her current financial status remains 
precarious and the likelihood of future financial difficulties remains a concern.  
 
 Despite being provided an opportunity to submit post-hearing evidence in 
mitigation, Applicant chose to provide incomplete documents that failed to support her 
testimony or convince me that her financial issues are being adequately addressed and 
are under control. Overall, the record leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
