KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence. 
In evaluating whether an applicant’s false statements are intentional, a Judge should consider
them in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  The Judge’s whole-person analysis complies
with the requirements of the Directive in that he considered Applicant’s security-significant
conduct in light of the record as a whole.  We are not permitted to consider the impact of an
unfavorable decision.  We have no authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary
clearance.  Adverse decision affirmed.   
CASE NO: 15-06532.a1
DATE: 2/16/2017
DATE: February 16, 2017
In Re:
---------------- 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06532
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
1, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 30, 2016, after the hearing, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s treatment of the
pertinent mitigating conditions was erroneous and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant retired from the U.S. military and is currently employed by a Defense contractor. 
His SOR lists several delinquent debts, which he attributed to his second wife.  He claimed that she 
misled him about their debts and the extent to which she was paying them.  Applicant’s ex-wife
signed a statement to that effect as well.  Applicant Exhibit (AE) B.
Applicant was discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001.  He had filed for relief in order
to avoid sole liability for debts incurred during the course of his first marriage.  Applicant’s SOR
debts include first and second mortgages on a property that went into foreclosure and was sold in
2010.  The first mortgage was discharged through foreclosure but the second was not.  The debts
also include one for a travel trailer that was repossessed and another for a credit card account. 
Applicant claimed that these debts were the responsibility of his second wife.
In completing a security clearance application (SCA) in 2012, Applicant did not disclose his
delinquent debts.  Specifically, he denied that he had defaulted on a loan, had debts turned over to
collection agencies, had credit cards suspended, or had been more than 120 days delinquent on his
debts.  His “no” answers to these questions were false.  He claimed that, when he completed the
SCA, he did not know the extent of his wife’s financial misconduct or the extent of his debts. 
However, AE C, an agreement that Applicant and his second wife signed months before he
completed the SCA, describes some of Applicant’s debts and demonstrates his knowledge of them. 
Applicant also stated that he did not put sufficient effort into filling out the SCA.  
Former servicemen who served with Applicant commend him for his dedication and
trustworthiness.  They recommend him for a position of trust.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved the bankruptcy discharge in Applicant’s favor.  He reached the opposite
conclusion for the remaining allegations.  He noted evidence that Applicant’s second wife
contributed to his financial problems.  However, he found Applicant’s presentation to be vague in
some respects, and he stated that Applicant seemed to believe that, once his ex-wife had admitted
her misconduct, he had no further responsibility to resolve his financial delinquencies.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant had not presented clear evidence in mitigation of the Guideline F concerns. 
Regarding Guideline E, the Judge found that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.  He stated that
Applicant knew, or should have known, about his delinquent debts.  
2
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his application of the mitigating conditions.  He
argues that the debts at issue were incurred years in the past and were due to the conduct of his ex-
wife.  He contends that the decision was based on evidence collected in 2012, which presumably
renders the evidence outdated.  He also cites to his successful military career.  The Judge made
findings about the evidence that Applicant discusses in his brief and addressed it in the Analysis
portion of the Decision.  Applicant’s reliance upon the age of his debts is not persuasive.  It is well
established that an applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and,
therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016).  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption
that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016). 
Applicant has not explicitly challenged the Judge’s findings and conclusions under Guideline
E.  However, he argues that the Judge failed to perform a meaningful whole-person analysis and that
the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  We conclude that this
argument reasonably embraces the allegation that he falsified his SCA.  In that regard, in evaluating
whether an applicant’s false statements or omissions are deliberate, a Judge must consider them in
light of the entirety of the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04226 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
In this case, the Judge appears to have done so.  For example, he made findings about
apparently inconsistent statements by Applicant that undermined his credibility–on one hand the
claim that he had completed his SCA hurriedly, on the other that he actually did not know about the
debts in question.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01056 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).  The Judge
also cited to Applicant’s own evidence to the effect that he was aware of his financial condition
months prior to completion of the SCA.1  All in all, the Judge’s findings and conclusions about
Applicant’s omissions are sustainable.  The Judge’s whole-person analysis regarding the entirety
of Applicant’s security-significant conduct complies with the requirements of Directive ¶ 6.3, in that
the Judge considered the totality of the evidence in reaching his decision. See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06653 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2016).
Applicant states that he has lost a job because of his loss of a clearance and that he now
works in a position that pays less money and offers fewer career options.  The Directive does not
1The Judge questioned Applicant about AE C, the agreement between Applicant and his ex-wife concerning
responsibility for marital debts.  “[Judge]: I understand that . . . you were attempting to divide up the debt . . . But, before
that date, they were your debts as well as hers.  Right?  You understood that at that time? [Applicant]: I knew that
technically they were mine because they were in my name. [Judge]: Right. [Applicant] So, the creditors would be coming
after me.”  Tr. at 55.  This testimony is not consistent with Applicant’s claim that, when he completed his SCA, he did
not know about his debts.  The Judge also questioned Applicant about the second mortgage on his house.  Although
Applicant had earlier denied knowing about this debt, he admitted to the Judge that he himself, rather than his wife, had
taken out the loan.  When the Judge asked him why he did not disclose this debt in his SCA, Applicant replied, “The very
short answer is I was a knucklehead.”  Tr. at 59-61.  
3
permit us to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02619 at
3 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2016).  Applicant requests that, if we are not able to reverse the Judge’s
conclusions, we grant him an interim clearance to give him an opportunity to demonstrate financial
responsibility.  We have no authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04289 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015). 
 The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, regarding both the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
