 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06110 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
January 26, 2015. On October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. 
¶ 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 13, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on February 1, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 16, 2016. Applicant did not 
submit a response. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. The 
Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 7) are admitted into evidence 
without objection. Additionally, the Government moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 
1.mm, alleging Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on November 13, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on 38 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $38,000, and an allegation that Applicant filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in 
2015. Applicant admitted all the allegations except she denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, b, n, o, r, and 
mm.3 She provided explanations with each of her answers to the SOR allegations, and 
included four documents.4 Her admissions, explanations and documentary evidence are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and employed by a defense contractor since 2014. She 
is unmarried and has three children. She completed some college and is seeking a 
security clearance. She was unemployed from October 2007 to March 2008. 
 
 Applicant’s debts include two civil judgments for a medical debt and apartment 
lease account. The remaining debts were placed in collections and include medical 
accounts, student loans, credit accounts, telephone and utility accounts, and county 
personal property tax. The SOR allegations and bankruptcy filing are supported in the 
record. 
 
 Generally, Applicant acknowledged the SOR debts, but in some cases disputed 
the amount or status, claiming most of the debts have been included in her Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on November 11, 2015, after completing 
court-mandated financial counseling. She did not provide evidence of the current status 
of the bankruptcy case, final discharge order, or her current financial status. 
 
 She also provided information on another counseling service, but no evidence that 
she completed it. Applicant noted in her Personal Subject Interview (PSI) that she stopped 
making payments on her student loans in 2010, and they were defaulted in 2011. She 
                                                     
3 SOR ¶ 1.mm is presumed to be denied since Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
4 Certificate of Financial Counseling; Notice of Bankruptcy Case Filing; District Court Civil Case Information 
Sheet (judgment); and budget counseling information sheet. 
 
3 
 
claimed that she is in a payment plan under a student loan rehabilitation agreement, but 
did not provide evidence of the plan or a history of payments under the plan.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.5 
The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the 
evidence.6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established law that no 
one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, “the 
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.7 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
                                                     
5 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
7 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
 Applicant incurred longstanding delinquent debts that have largely gone 
unresolved. She filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy after the SOR was issued, and has not shown 
a final resolution of the bankruptcy or her current financial status. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b), as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The act of filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy alone is not a disqualifying condition. SOR 
¶ 1.mm is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant allowed her debts to remain unresolved for many years. Although she 
suffered a period of unemployment that may have contributed to her financial problems, 
she has been steadily employed in her current position since 2014. She filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, but has not shown the current status of the case or that her present financial 
condition is stable. I have no information about her financial track record since filing 
bankruptcy that would show similar issues are unlikely to recur in the future. There is 
evidence of completed financial counseling, but there is no evidence that Applicant’s 
financial problems are resolved or under control.  
 
 Her overall financial irresponsibility and her current financial condition cast doubt 
on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I have inadequate information to 
determine that her financial circumstances are under control or that she is willing and able 
to meet her past and future financial obligations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Overall, the absence of an updated financial record leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – ll:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.mm:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
