1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-01431
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jeffrey Billett, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems stemmed from the national housing market
downturn in 2008 rather than to any exorbitant spending. Of the two SOR debts, he has
successfully disputed one, and he is in the process of negotiating the resolution of the
other one. Clearance is granted.
 Statement of the Case
On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006. 
This property had a second  mortgage that totaled $32,000.1
2
 
Applicant answered the SOR, denying the allegations and requesting a hearing.
The hearing was held as scheduled. I received four government exhibits (GE 1 - 4),
eight Applicant exhibits (AE A - AE H), and I considered Applicant’s testimony. At the
close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s request, to allow him the
opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted one
additional exhibit that I admitted and incorporated into the record as AE I. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals received the transcript (Tr.) on October 25, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old married man with two children, ages 23 and 16. He is a
high school graduate and has earned several years of college credits. He works two full-
time jobs in the information technology field. (Tr. 54) He provides support to defense
contractors in both jobs, providing systems administration on his night job, and service
administration during his day job. Per a longtime friend, he is a “man of character” with a
“high moral and ethical makeup.” (AE H) Applicant has held a security clearance for six
years. (Answer at 2)
Applicant has been a homeowner since 2002. A part-time realtor, he purchased
two rental properties between 2005 and 2007. (Answer at 2) The property purchased in
2005 was secured by two mortgages. The amount alleged to be delinquent in SOR
subparagraph 1.a is the owed to the primary mortgagor. The property purchased in
2007 is not the subject of either of the SOR allegations. 
Initially, Applicant’s real estate investments were successful, as his tenants
steadily paid their rents and the property values increased. By 2008, however, his good
tenants moved, and he was unable to replace them with quality, rent-paying tenants.
Unable to find good tenants, Applicant attempted to sell his properties. In an effort to
enhance the value of the property referenced in subparagraph 1.a, he refinanced the
primary mortgage,  cashing out approximately $30,000 to remodel it. (Tr. 36) The1
balance of the primary mortgage increased from $157,000 to $188,000, as alleged in
SOR subparagraph 1.a. (Tr. 37-38)
At or about the time Applicant was attempting to sell his rental properties, the
national housing market collapsed, impeding his efforts to sell them. Balancing the
mortgage payments on the rental properties without any incoming rent became
increasingly difficult, and Applicant started to become financially overextended. (Tr. 33)
In 2009, Applicant managed to sell the property that is not the subject of either of the
SOR allegations, making a $20,000 profit. (Tr. 75) The property alleged in
subparagraph 1.a remained vacant, however. Applicant later applied for a loan
modification, but the creditor rejected it. 
3
 
In 2010, the junior mortgagor of the property, that is the subject of subparagraph
1.a, foreclosed the mortgage. (AE D at 8) The subsequent resale covered the balance
of the second mortgage, releasing Applicant from any further obligation to this
mortgagor. (AE D at 4; Tr. 32, 67)  The primary mortgagor was not a party to the
foreclosure. Some time after 2010, the primary mortgagor assigned the mortgage to the
creditor alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. In July 2015, the creditor referenced in SOR
subparagraph 1.a filed a notice of intent to foreclose. In response, Applicant retained an
attorney. In October 2015, Applicant’s attorney contacted the creditor, disputing the
foreclosure effort, and threatening to countersue for fraudulent foreclosure, as the
property had already been foreclosed and resold. (AE F at 1) Approximately one year
later, in September 2016, the creditor contacted Applicant, informing him that it was
releasing the lien, forgiving the mortgage debt, and ceasing any collection activity. (AE
G)
The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b is the second mortgage on
Applicant’s primary residence, stemming from a 2009 refinance. (Tr. 57) It totals
$36,000. Some time after Applicant began having financial difficulties, he successfully
applied for a loan modification. As part of the modification, the creditor who held both
mortgages, charged off the second mortgage and reduced the interest rate on the first
mortgage from nine percent to five percent, reducing Applicant’s monthly payment by
approximately $900.  (Tr. 58) As part of the modification, the creditor charged off the
second mortgage and assigned it to a collection agency. (Tr. 46) Currently, Applicant is
negotiating with the assigned creditor to settle it. (Tr. 50-51)
Applicant keeps a budget. He has $6,000 in savings and $75,000 invested in his
retirement account. (AE I) Since starting a full-time second job two and a half years ago,
his disposable income has increased significantly. More recently, his monthly expenses
have decreased, as his oldest child finished college and is supporting herself
independently. (Tr. 51, 54) Currently, his monthly, discretionary income totals $4,143.
(AE I)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
4
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debt; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by extravagant spending.
Instead, they were incurred when a downturn in his rental property business coincided
with the national housing market collapse. Applicant dealt with these financial difficulties
responsibly, cutting back living expenses, obtaining a second full-time job, and obtaining
the reduction of his home mortgage payments through a loan modification. As for the
delinquent mortgage alleged in subparagraph 1.a, the most significant of the two SOR
debts, Applicant successfully disputed it, as the creditor released its claim after
5
 
Applicant retained an attorney, challenged the basis of the creditor’s claim, and
threatened litigation.
The debt owed to the creditor alleged in subparagraph 1.b remains unresolved.
Applicant is negotiating the resolution of this debt. Given Applicant’s significant monthly
discretionary income, his savings, and the responsible manner that he addressed the
financial crisis generated by the downturn in his rental property investments, I am
confident that he will resolve the remaining SOR debt, as promised. In sum, I conclude
that all of the aforementioned mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered Applicant’s good character reference in the resolution of this case.
In tandem with the circumstances surrounding the incurrence of the delinquencies, and
the steps Applicant has taken to resolve them, I conclude that he has mitigated the
security concern.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
PARAGRAPH 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
6
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
