  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-00619 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. The DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated December 15, 2015, detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
  2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2016. She denied the four financial 
allegations. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 18, 2016. The 
case was assigned to another administrative judge and then to me on October 19, 
2016. The DOD issued a notice of hearing on January 6, 2017, for a hearing on January 
11, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered three exhibits 
that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1, 2 and 3. Applicant testified and submitted seven exhibits that I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through G. I 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 17, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is a 45-year-old high school graduate. She has taken 
some college-level courses, but did not receive a degree. She has been married since 
July 1998 and has three adult children and an adult stepson all living at home. Her 
children do not contribute to the family income. She is employed part time as a 
background investigator for a government contractor. She also works part time as a 
compliance manager for a defense contractor. (Tr. 11-12, 27-28; GX 1, EQIP, dated 
September 3, 3013)  
The SOR alleges a federal tax lien entered in December 2014 against Applicant 
and her husband for federal income tax owed of $48,001 (SOR 1.a). The SOR also 
alleges a state tax lien entered against Applicant in January 2015 for state income tax of 
$13,145 (SOR 1.b). It was further alleged that Applicant did not file a federal tax return 
for 2013 (SOR 1.c), or state tax return for 2013 (SOR 1.d).  
Applicant worked mostly from home and maintained a home office. Her husband 
was a plumber. Applicant’s husband and his sister, who is employed by a large tax 
preparation firm, prepared the 2009 to 2012 tax returns for Applicant and her husband. 
For tax years 2009 to 2012, Applicant and her husband claimed deductions on their 
federal and state tax returns for home office expenses and her husband’s plumbing 
tools. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audited Applicant and her husband’s tax 
returns in 2012, and the deductions were denied. Applicant and her husband were 
assessed substantial tax liability in December 2013 for both federal and state taxes for 
2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012. (Tr. 16-18, 28-32, 57-58) 
Applicant and her husband agreed to a payment plan with the IRS and started to 
make payments. After they made payments for four months, Applicant’s husband had a 
massive stroke on March 7, 2014. Applicant’s husband is now bedridden and can no 
longer work. He is cared for in a long-term care facility. (Tr. 18-19; AX F, Letter, dated 
January 11, 2016) 
Applicant had her own medical problems when her husband had his stroke. She 
had decided that she could not work full time, and she retired from full time employment 
on March 5, 2014. Applicant no longer had two incomes and could not make more 
payments to the IRS. Their last regular monthly payment to the IRS was in March 2014. 
  3 
 
The IRS determined in December 2014 that the federal tax debt was uncollectible. The 
IRS will not seek payment for the taxes unless there is a change in Applicant’s income. 
(Tr. 20-23; AX B, IRS Letter, dated December 17, 2014) 
Applicant now works two part-time jobs for government contractors as a 
background investigator and a compliance manager. She is paid on a case basis as a 
background investigator and earns approximately $500 to $800 monthly. Her monthly 
income as a compliance manager is approximately $2,200. Her total monthly income is 
$3,000. Her monthly expenses are approximately $2,900, leaving a monthly remainder 
of $100. Her husband receives $2,076 in Social Security Disability Income (SSDI). His 
long-term care expenses consume almost all of his disability income. Applicant still must 
provide for his personal needs. (Tr. 24-26, 54-56, AX G, SSDI Letter, dated September 
7, 2016) 
Applicant filed her 2013 tax return eight months late in December 2014 because 
she needed the audit completed to prepare the return. Applicant filed her 2014 and 
2015 tax returns on time. She received a refund each year. The IRS applied her refunds 
for 2013, 2014, and 2015 to her tax debt. Applicant is eligible to make an offer-in-
compromise with the IRS in January 2017. Applicant has not had an opportunity to 
make the offer-in-compromise, but intends to take advantage of the opportunity soon. 
(Tr. 27-30, 45-47, 56-57; AX C, 2013 Tax return, dated December 12, 2014; AX D, IRS 
Refund Notice, dated October 17, 2016)  
Applicant has attempted to establish a payment plan with her state of residence. 
However, they have not been able to reach an agreement because the state requires a 
large initial payment Applicant cannot afford. She is still working with the state to reach 
an agreement. In addition, Applicant is working with her mortgage holder to have her 
mortgage modified so she can have additional funds to apply to her and her husband’s 
care expenses and pay other debts. (Tr. 20-12, 41-45; AX E, State Tax Letter, dated 
January 9, 2015) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
  4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
Applicant and her husband’s federal taxes were audited and some deductions 
were not allowed. They were accessed large federal and state tax debts. They reached 
a payment plan with the IRS. Shortly after starting payments on the plan, Applicant’s 
husband suffered a severe medical problem and could no longer work. Applicant was 
only able to work part time because of her own medical condition and the need to help 
care for her husband. Applicant could not pay on the plan. She did not file the following 
  5 
 
year’s tax returns on time because of the tax audit. Applicant’s delinquent federal and 
state taxes, and her failure to file tax returns on time are sufficient to raise the following 
security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as   
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
These mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial problems are the result of 
a federal tax audit and denial of certain deductions. When their tax liability was 
determined, Applicant and her husband reached a payment plan with the IRS. They 
made some payments on the plan before her husband had a severe medical issue 
prohibiting him from working again. With the loss of his income and her inability to work 
full time, Applicant could no longer pay the IRS agreed plan. The IRS determined the 
debt was not collectible.  
 
Applicant attempted to reach a payment agreement with the state. They have not 
reached an agreement but negotiations on an agreement are still ongoing.  
Applicant is current with filing her federal and state tax returns. The conditions 
that led to Applicant federal and state tax problems were beyond her control and cause 
by her husband’s unexpected medical issues leading to his loss of employment. The 
circumstances are continuing and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant established that she acted responsibly 
  6 
 
under the circumstances. She reached a payment agreement with the IRS. She was 
paying the debt when her husband had his unfortunate medical issue. She notified the 
IRS and the debt was determined to be uncollectible. She continues to negotiate a 
payment plan with the state. She filed her 2013 tax returns and has timely filed her 2014 
and 2015 tax returns. She has shown a good-faith effort to resolve her federal and state 
tax liabilities. I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns based on 
financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred a federal and 
state tax debt. She reached a payment agreement with the IRS. She was paying the 
debt under the agreed plan when her husband suffered a catastrophic medical problem 
precluding him from working. With the loss of his income and her ability to work only 
part time because she had to care for her husband, Appicant could not continue to pay 
her tax debt under the plan. The IRS determined the debt was not collectible. She 
continued to negotiate a payment plan with the state. Applicant presented sufficient 
information to establish that she acted reasonably and responsibly towards her finances 
under the circumstances. There is clear evidence that she will continue to responsibly 
manage her financial obligations. There is ample evidence of her honesty, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant 
has mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
  7 
 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
