 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-08676 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 8, 2015. On 
June 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 29, 
2016, and the case was assigned to me on November 10, 2016. On November 14, 
2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for December 5, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through K, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record 
open until December 20, 2016, to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary 
evidence. He timely submitted AX L through U, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.m and 2.a. His admissions in his answer and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old civilian mariner, employed as a storekeeper by 
defense contractors since April 2005, with periods of unemployment between contracts. 
He has consistently received top performance evaluations since January 2015. (AX A-
G.) He does not have a security clearance. 
 
Applicant served on active duty from March 1988 to January 1995 and received a 
general discharge under honorable conditions because of a “pattern of misconduct.” As 
part of his discharge processing, he acknowledged being advised that the basis for his 
discharge made him ineligible to reenlist. He was a second class petty officer (E-5) 
before his pattern of misconduct began, and he left the Navy as a seaman apprentice 
(E-2). His misconduct consisted of military nonjudicial punishment for drunk driving in 
April 1994; a civilian conviction of reckless driving in July 1994; military nonjudicial 
punishment for drunk driving and unauthorized absence in August 1994; military 
nonjudicial punishment for disobedience by driving on base after his driving privileges 
were revoked and unauthorized absence in August 1994, and a civilian conviction of 
driving under the influence in October 1994.2 (GX 5.)  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
2 The conduct underlying Applicant’s administrative discharge from the Navy was not alleged in the SOR, 
and it may not be used as an independent basis for denying his application. However, conduct not 
alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular 
adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of 
a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the 
unalleged conduct for these limited purposes. 
 
3 
 
When Applicant submitted his SCA, he stated that he received an honorable 
discharge. (GX 1 at 28.) At the hearing, he testified that he completed his SCA while at 
work, was distracted by a co-worker as he was dealing with the question about the 
characterization of his discharge from the Navy, and he “just saw honorable, and hit 
honorable.” He testified that he does not recall seeing “general under honorable 
conditions” in the drop-down menu for the types of discharges, and he thought a 
general discharge was the same as an honorable discharge. (Tr. 68-69.) He denied 
intentionally falsifying his SCA. (Tr. 49.) 
 
 Applicant married in June 1995 and divorced in July 2004. He married his current 
wife in November 2006. He has three children from his first marriage, ages 17, 22, and 
24. 
 
 Applicant testified that his rotation as a civilian mariner is four or five months at 
sea followed by a break in employment for four or five months. He is paid only when he 
is on a ship. When he is at sea, he has a direct deposit to a joint bank account, and he 
counts on his wife to pay the bills. When he received the SOR, it was an “eye opener,” 
because he was unaware of the derogatory information in his CBRs. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts, including a child-support arrearage, a 
federal tax lien, and three state tax liens, which are reflected in two credit bureau 
reports (CBRs) from May 2015 and December 2015. The evidence concerning these 
debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: child-support arrearage placed for collection in two accounts for 
$18,751 and $6,546. Applicant testified that he has been required by a court order to 
pay $728 per month on the arrearage, and he has been making multiple payments 
totaling $850-$900 each month for six or seven years. He could not explain why two 
separate collection accounts were listed in his CBR. (Tr. 70.) He submitted 
documentation that he has been making regular payments since October 2007, the 
payments were increased to $728 per month around May 2013, and that he has been 
making monthly multiple payments totaling more than the required $728 since May 
2013. The balance on the arrearage as of November 2016 was about $15,656. (Tr. 41; 
AX P.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: bill for satellite television service, placed for collection of $750. 
Applicant testified that his current wife opened this account without his knowledge, and 
that in October 2016 he made an agreement with the creditor to resolve this debt by 
monthly payments. (Tr. 41-42, 50.) As of the date of the hearing, he had made no 
payments. (Tr. 54.) On the day after the hearing, the collection agency sent Applicant a 
bill for a $125 payment, due on December 15, 2016, five days before the record closed. 
(AX N.) The bill corroborates his testimony that he made a payment agreement with the 
creditor. However, in his post-hearing submission, he provided no documentary 
evidence that he made the $125 payment or any other payments.   
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: bill for telephone service charged off for $709. Applicant testified 
that this account also was opened by his wife without his knowledge, and that he had 
made an agreement to resolve it by monthly payments. (Tr. 42.) On December 6, 2015, 
the day after the hearing, he received a bill for a $125 payment. On December 7, 2015, 
a collection agency contacted Applicant and informed him that it had purchased the 
debt, and offered to settle the debt for $500. (AX N; AX O; AX Q; AX R.) Applicant 
provided no documentary evidence that he accepted the settlement offer or made any 
payments. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: state tax lien filed in April 2007 for $1,637. Applicant testified that 
he was unaware of this debt until he received the SOR. (Tr. 43.) On December 17, 
2016, after the hearing, Applicant applied for an installment agreement to resolve this 
debt, providing for monthly $250 payments. (AX L.) On the same day, he sent money 
orders for $163 and $45 to the state tax authority. (AX M at 1.) He provided no evidence 
that the state tax authority agreed to accept installment payments. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: state tax lien filed in October 2006 for $1,799. Applicant testified 
that he was unaware of this debt until he received the SOR. (Tr. 43.) He testified that 
the tax lien was for property taxes on a van that was jointly owned but given to his first 
wife after their divorce. (Tr. 58.) On December 6, 2016, the day after the hearing, 
Applicant sent a money order for $75 to the state tax authority. (AX T.) He provided no 
evidence that the state tax authority agreed to accept installment payments. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: federal tax lien filed in May 2009 for $14,657. Applicant testified 
that he was unaware of this debt until he received the SOR, and that he tried to make a 
payment arrangement with the IRS. (Tr. 44, 59.) After the hearing, he submitted a 
telefax cover sheet sent to the IRS, asking for a “confirmation letter.” (AX S.) He did not 
submit any documentary evidence of a payment agreement or a response to his telefax. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: state tax lien filled in October 2006 for $1,798. This is the same 
debt as SOR ¶ 1.e. It was entered on the same day in the same court, and the case 
numbers are the same, except that the lien in SOR ¶ 1.e has a dash inserted after the 
first digit of the case number. (GX 3 at 6.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m: medical bill, placed for collection of $746; cellphone bill, 
placed for collection of $30; medical bill, placed for collection of $365; medical 
bill, placed for collection of $354; tire store debt, past due for $653, with a balance 
of $958; collection account for $250. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the medical bill for $746, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, but at the hearing he denied the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m. He testified that he had no knowledge of these debts, and 
he suspected that someone incurred them in his name or charged them to his medical 
insurance without his knowledge. (Tr. 45-48.) After the hearing, he provided a list of the 
creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m and their telephone numbers, and he stated that 
none of the creditors had a record of an account in his name and none of the debts are 
reflected on his current CBR. (AX U.)  The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j was placed for 
collection in March 2010 and would have been deleted from his credit record under the 
 
5 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act.3 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, and 1.k-1.m were 
placed for collection less than seven years preceding the December 2015 CBR. 
However, none of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m are reflected in the December 
2015 CBR (GX 3.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) reflecting that he and 
his wife have monthly income of about $3,780, expenses of about $3,393, and a net 
monthly remainder of about $387. (AX I.) He testified that when he is not working on a 
ship, his income consists of unemployment compensation, and it is much higher when 
he is at sea. At sea, his monthly pay ranges from about $5,500 to $8,000 per month, 
depending on the size of the ship. (Tr. 63.) At the hearing, he was unsure about how the 
numbers in the PFS were computed, because he trusted his wife to complete it. (Tr. 53-
54.) His federal income tax return for tax year 2015 reflected wages of $105,183. (AX 
K.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife submitted a statement attesting to Applicant’s qualities as a 
loving, devoted husband who acts responsibly toward his obligations. (AX I.) His wife’s 
nephew testified that he regards Applicant as a “father figure,” who is kind hearted, 
honest, trustworthy, and loyal. (Tr. 22-26.) One of Applicant’s friends for the past 11 
years considers him honest, trustworthy, and reliable. (Tr. 31-32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute 
of limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
6 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
7 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g duplicates the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Thus, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.g in 
Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Applicant admitted the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h in his answer to the 
SOR, but he denied it at the hearing. He also denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i-
1.m in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing. The Government has the burden of 
providing substantial evidence to prove disputed debts. It is well settled that adverse 
information from a CBR report will normally meet the requirement in Directive ¶ E3.1.14 
that an allegation be supported by substantial evidence. ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010.) However, in this case the CBRs submitted by the Government 
are conflicting. The May 2015 CBR reflected the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m; but the 
December 2015 CBR does not reflect them. Only one debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j, would 
have been deleted from his CBRs due to passage of time. Due to the contradictory 
evidence regarding the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m, I conclude that they are not 
established by substantial evidence. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs and the documentary 
evidence submitted at the hearing, establish the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.f, and they raise two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant encountered several conditions 
largely beyond his control: his marital breakup in 2004, his multiple periods of 
unemployment between assignments to sea duty, and his wife’s unauthorized opening 
of the accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c without his knowledge. He has acted responsibly 
regarding the child-support arrearage. However, he has not acted responsibly regarding 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f. He made no effort to monitor his finances or 
determine his financial situation until he received the SOR in June 2016. He appears to 
have made payment agreements for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c in October 2016, 
but he submitted no documentary evidence of any payments made in accordance with 
the agreements. He took no meaningful action to resolve the tax liens in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.f 
until after the hearing. He continues to trust his wife to manage the family finances, 
without any meaningful involvement on his part, in spite of his testimony that she 
incurred debts in his name without his knowledge. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling and his financial situation is not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the child-support arrearage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. It 
is not established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f. This mitigating condition 
requires a showing of good faith. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past 
irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for 
a security clearance. While Applicant has taken some steps to resolve the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b-1.f, he has done too little too late.  
 
 The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on 
all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged in the SOR first, or establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has not presented a 
coherent and credible plan for resolving his delinquent debts, nor has he submitted 
evidence of significant actions to resolve them. 
 
 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a-1.f, because 
Applicant has not disputed them. He denied owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m, 
and I have resolved these allegations in his favor. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .”  When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of 
education are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he was an experienced adult. He knew that 
his Navy service had been terminated because of his misconduct. As part of his out-
processing, he was specifically informed that his discharge made him ineligible to 
reenlist in the future. I found his explanation that he considered his discharge to be the 
equivalent of an honorable discharge implausible and unpersuasive. Thus, I conclude 
that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and  
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
10 
 
 AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) are not established. Applicant made no effort to correct 
his falsification. His falsification was not “minor,” because falsification of a security 
clearance application “strikes at the heart of the security clearance process.” ISCR 
Case No. 09-01652 (App .Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) It was recent and did not happen under 
unique circumstances. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his financial delinquencies and personal conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.m:    For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
