   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04779 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on July 17, 2014. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 12,2015, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant received the SOR on January 12, 20164. He submitted a notarized, 
written response to the SOR allegations, and he requested a decision on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
   
 
2 
 
 
 Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy on March 18, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on March 
25, 2016. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit a response. DOHA assigned 
this case to me on January 3, 2017. The Government submitted four exhibits, which have 
been marked as Items 1-4 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the SOR 
has been marked as Item 5, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to South Korea. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of 
general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute, and they are set out in 
the Findings of Fact below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as a finding of fact. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, who is 56 years old, works as a senior architect with a DOD contractor. 
Applicant began his current employment in February 2006. He has worked for many 
federal agencies as a contractor both in the United States and abroad. The record lacks 
any evidence of disciplinary actions or problems with mishandling classified documents. 
(Answer to SOR) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in the United States. He graduated from high school 
in the states in 1979. He received a bachelor’s and a master’s degree from an American 
university in 1984 and 1994 respectively. Applicant has held a security clearance since 
about 2003. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant and his wife married in March 1998 in the United States. His wife was 
born and raised in South Korea. She is now a naturalized United States citizen. There is 
no record of children. In the last ten years, Applicant has not traveled to South Korea. 
(Item 2) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law, who is 97 and ill, is a citizen and resident of South Korea, 
and is retired. His mother-in-law, a citizen and resident of South Korea, is a housewife. 
His father-in-law does not speak English and his mother-in-law knows some English. His 
brother-in-law, a citizen and resident of South Korea, works for a university as a professor. 
His sisters-in-law are citizens and resident of South Korea, and they are house wives. 
(Item 3) Applicant maintains yearly contact with them by phone or email. They are staunch 
supporters of the United States. Applicant’s wife’s nephew worked at the South Korean 
Embassy in Washington, DC from 2012 until 2014. He currently lives in Nigeria. (Item 3)  
   
 
3 
 
 
From 2014, when the nephew left the United States, Applicant has not had contact with 
him. (Answer to SOR) The family members do not have any knowledge of the nature of 
Applicant’s work or his security clearance. Applicant was emphatic that he never 
discussed the nature of his work with his nephew. When he was in any communication 
with him, Applicant was very careful not to discuss even general matters. 
 
 Applicant denied that any of his immediate family members had any affiliation with 
a foreign government, military, security, defense industry, or intelligence service, with the 
exception of his wife’s nephew who now lives in Nigeria. When the nephew was at the 
Embassy in Washington DC, Applicant had contact with him, but since he left in 2014 to 
live in Nigeria, Applicant has no communication. Applicant communicates with his wife’s 
family by email or phone. He does not provide financial support to his family members in 
South Korea. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant owns his own home. He does not financially support anyone in South 
Korea. All his assets are located in the United States. He is financially secure with a good 
income. He has no debts, save a car loan on which he is current. (Answer to SOR) He 
attends church with his wife and is a member of the church community. 
 
South Korea 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts related to South Korea. South 
Korea is currently a stable, democratic republic. The United States and South Korea have 
been close allies since 1950, and they have fought communism on the Korean peninsula 
and in Vietnam. The United States, since 1950 and currently, has thousands of U.S. 
military personnel stationed in South Korea, and it frequently conducts joint military 
operations with South Korea. South Korea is the United States’ seventh largest trading 
partner. 
 
 The South Korean government generally respects the human rights of its citizens. 
South Korea has some political prisoners, and some rules regarding arrest and detention 
are vague. 
 
 South Korea does not recognize dual citizenship. All South Korean males between 
the ages of 18 and 35 are subject to compulsory military service. Dual citizens may avoid 
military service by renouncing their South Korean citizenship by March 31 of the year 
when they become 18 years old. There have been circumstances where U.S. citizens of 
South Korean descent were drafted into the South Korean Army when they visited South 
Korea. 
 
 In recent years, the United States and South Korea have differed in their diplomatic 
approaches towards North Korea. The United States’ position is more assertive in its 
attempts to curtail North Korea’s development of advanced military technology, such as 
ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons. South Korea has emphasized steps towards 
unification of North and South Korea. 
 
   
 
4 
 
 
 Industrial espionage includes seeking commercial secrets. South Korea has a 
history of collecting protected U.S. information. On several occasions, South Korea has 
been the unauthorized recipient of sensitive technology, in violation of U.S. export control 
laws. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the  
“whole-person  concept.”  The  administrative  judge  must  consider  all  available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
   
 
5 
 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen and resident of the United States. Thus, no security 
concern is raised by her. Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, sisters-in-law, and 
brother-in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea. His family relationships are not 
per se a reason to deny Applicant a security clearance, but his contacts with his family 
members in South Korea must be considered in deciding whether to grant Applicant a 
clearance. Contacts with his wife’s family members may create a risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by other entities or could 
create a potential conflict of interest between his obligations to protect sensitive 
   
 
6 
 
 
information and his desire to help his family members. These factors must be considered 
when determining if a heightened risk exists. 
 
 In determining if such a risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s relationships and 
contacts with his extended family, as well as the activities of the Government of South 
Korea and of other entities within South Korea. The risk that an applicant could be 
targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising classified information is real, not 
theoretical. Applicant’s relationship and contacts with his extended family in South Korea 
raise a heightened risk and a security concern because of the economic espionage by 
the South Korean government or other entities in South Korea. The evidence of record 
fails to show that the South Korean Government targets U.S. citizens in the United States 
or in South Korea by pressuring, or coercing them to obtain protected information. Thus, 
the concern that the South Korean Government will seek classified U.S. information from 
individuals is less than it would be with some other nations. The same cannot be said 
about the South Korean government and other organizations, whose goals are to obtain 
economic information and technology from companies in the United States. 
 
 Under the guideline, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to 
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests. 
In determining if Applicant’s contacts in South Korea cause security concerns, I 
considered that South Korea and the United States have a relationship, which includes 
working together on international security issues and trade. There is no evidence that the 
South Korean Government targets U.S. citizens using pressure or coercion for protected 
classified information. While none of these considerations by themselves dispose of the 
issue, they are all factors to be considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to 
pressure or coercion because of his family members in South Korea. Based on all these 
factors, Applicant’s contacts raise a heightened risk under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b). 
 
 The foreign influence guideline also includes examples of conditions that can 
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 8(a) through ¶ 8(f), 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
   
 
7 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s telephone contacts with his wife’s family members in South Korea is 
sufficient to establish more than minimal contacts. He also saw his wife’s nephew while 
he was working in the United States for the South Korean Embassy.  AG ¶ 8(c) does not 
apply. His father-in-law is retired. His mother-in-law and sisters-in-law are housewives. 
His brother-in-law is a professor in a university. None of these family members has any 
connections to the South Korean government or terrorist organizations. His wife’s nephew 
is connected to the South Korean Embassy in Nigeria, but does not know the nature of 
Applicant’s work and due to the location in Nigeria, there is little to no communication. His 
wife’s family members are not likely to place Applicant in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and of South Korea.  
 
 Applicant is an American citizen by birth. His closest family members live in the 
United States. He has contacts with his wife’s family members in South Korea, but they 
are not dependent upon him for support. These family members are not likely to place 
Applicant in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United States and 
of South Korea because the United States is Applicant’s home and always has been, and 
because of the close ties between the United States and South Korea. His foreign 
contacts are not likely to create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. All the extended 
family members live and work quietly. Applicant has no divided loyalties. He was born in 
the United States to American parents. He has worked and lived in the United States. His 
professional and personal life are in the United States. He has worked abroad at the 
direction of the various federal agencies in his contract work. He has a long record of 
loyalty to the United States. I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflicts 
of interest in favor of the United States. He has mitigated the Guideline B security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 8(a)-(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
   
 
8 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or 
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both 
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the 
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is 
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but 
on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus 
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
 
 The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the 
whole-person  concept  is  more  substantial  than  the  evidence  in  support  of  denial. 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the United States. His immediate family, 
including his wife, are citizens and residents of the United States. They have no plans to 
return to South Korea to live. Their decisions over the last 18 years reflect active choices 
to support the United States. In reviewing the evidence of record as a whole, there is little 
likelihood that Applicant can be coerced or pressured to reveal classified information or 
mishandle sensitive materials. If there were any occasion, Applicant would resolve any 
issue in favor of the United States. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence under 
Guideline B. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
