 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02850 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F, Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on August 11, 2014. (Item 
5) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
November 27, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 1, 2016, admitting the five delinquent 
debt allegations with explanation. He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
March 28, 2016. (Item 8) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) 
on March 30, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely 
filed a response to the FORM. (Item 9) I was assigned the case on February 13, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 5) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the summary. In his response to the FORM, Applicant did not object to consideration 
of the PSI. Any objection to the information is waived. I will consider information in the 
PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 56 years old. He graduated from high school in 1978, and received his 
bachelor’s degree in civil engineering in 1982. He served in the Navy from April 1983 
until February 1992 when he was honorably discharged. He held a number of different 
positions including part-time school teacher, and self-employed as a restaurant owner. 
In 2014, he started working with a defense contractor as a construction surveillance 
technician. The defense contractor is his sponsor for a security clearance. He continued 
also to be self-employed. He married in September 1983 and has three grown children 
(Item 3, EQIP, dated July 16, 2014; Item 5, PSI, dated August 11, 2014)  
 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated August 5, 2014; Item 6, dated 
March 6, 2014; and Item 7, dated October 20, 2015),and Applicant’s admissions (Item 
2, Answer to SOR ,dated January 30, 2016, and Item 9, Response to FORM, dated May 
30, 2016) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a cable television debt in 
collection for $119 (SOR 1.a); a federal tax lien for $38,148 (SOR 1.b); a judgment for 
an individual for $1,130 (SOR 1.c); a telephone service debt in collection for $115 (SOR 
1.d); and a debt to a car towing service in collection for $2,470 (SOR 1e). The total 
amount of the delinquent debt is approximately $42,000.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was late in paying three small service debts. He rented a duplex to a 
tenant who had a pet that soiled the carpet. Applicant did not return the security deposit 
until the tenant had the carpet professionally cleaned. The tenant filed a small claim 
against Applicant for the cost of the carpet cleaning. Applicant was required to return 
the amount of the carpet cleaning. Applicant no longer owns the duplex. Applicant 
presented documents in his response to the SOR that he paid the television service 
debt at SOR 1.a (Item 2, Encl. 2); the judgment for the carpet cleaning at SOR 1.c (Item 
2, Encl. 4); the telephone debt at SOR 1.d (Item 2, Encl. 5); and the car towing service 
debt at SOR 1.e (Item 2, Encl. 6).  
 
Applicant and his wife owned a small restaurant. In 2011, the business was 
audited by both the state tax authority and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 
Applicant hired a professional tax service to assist him in correctly filing and completing 
his federal and state taxes. (Item 2, Response to SOR) Applicant had used the incorrect 
accounting method for the business resulting in Applicant owing over $86,000 in federal 
and state taxes for tax years 2007 to 2010. (Item 2, Encl. 3) The state and IRS entered 
tax liens against Applicant. Applicant enrolled in courses in March and April 2012, 
monitored by the state tax authority and the IRS, that provided him the education 
needed to correctly report his business income and expenses. 
 
Applicant reached an agreement to pay his back state taxes. The state tax lien 
was released in May 2014 (Item 9, Response to FORM, at Attachment G). Applicant 
entered an agreement with the IRS to pay his back federal taxes. Applicant completed 
the agreement and the federal tax lien at SOR 1.b was paid in full in May 2016. (Item 9, 
Response to FORM, at Attachments G and H) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal and Applicant admitted that he had five delinquent debts, 
including a federal tax lien and a judgment. The evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises an issue about Applicant’s willingness and ability to 
meet his financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse 
financial issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
 
5 
 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 All of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Applicant used an incorrect accounting 
method to determine his business taxes. An audit resulted in a lien for federal taxes. 
Applicant took courses to learn about the correct accounting method to use. He was late 
in paying three small debts, and a judgement to return a security deposit was filed by a 
tenant. Applicant no longer owns the property. The events resulting in the debts were 
caused by conditions largely beyond his control. Applicant acted responsibly by 
developing and completing a plan to pay his debts. He received financial counseling by 
attending classes to learn the correct accounting methods for his business. There is a 
clear evidence that his financial problems have been resolved and his finances are 
under control.  
  
 Applicant presented sufficient evidence that his delinquent debts in the SOR are 
paid in full and all liens are released. Applicant has shown that he acted reasonably and 
responsibly in regard to his financial obligations. His financial problems are under 
control. His reasonable and responsible action towards his finances is a strong 
indication that he will protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant presented 
sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s nine years 
of service in the Navy. Applicant provided sufficient credible documentary information to 
show that he incurred delinquent debt by conditions beyond his control. He established 
that he took reasonable and responsible action to resolve his financial obligations by 
making all of the payments required under a payment plan. His delinquent debts are 
paid in full. Applicant demonstrated appropriate management of his finances and a 
record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has established his suitability for access to classified information. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from 
his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
