 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-01787 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se1  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant admitted having shared marijuana in social settings with her former 
boyfriend and other friends on ten or fewer occasions in her life, including three or four 
times between October 2005 and January 2011 while she held a security clearance. She 
terminated her relationship with that boyfriend after resolving to stop drug abuse. She 
lives an active and healthy lifestyle and regrets having succumbed to pressure to share 
marijuana in the past. Resulting security concerns were fully mitigated. Based on a review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on November 5, 
2012.2  On October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security 
                                                 
1 In the letter forwarding Applicant’s response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated April 11, 
2016, she stated that Jason M. Pelt, Esquire, assisted her with preparation of that response. (AE A.) 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).3 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 21, 2015, and requested that 
her case be decided by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) on the written record, without a hearing. 4  Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Materials (FORM)5 on March 11, 2016. A 
complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, and she was provided an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM.  
 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of the FORM on March 21, 
2016. She submitted a response, dated April 11, 2016, in which she made no objection to 
any contents of the FORM. Department Counsel offered no objection to Applicant’s 
response, which is admitted into the record as Exhibit (AE) A. DOHA assigned the case to 
me on November 1, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where she has 
worked since December 2004, except for a year and a half in 2007 and 2008 when she 
lived and worked in another state. She has held a security clearance since January 2005, 
in connection with her employment. She graduated from high school in 2002, and has 
never served in the military. She has never married and has a 10-year-old daughter. (Item 
3; Item 6; AE A.) 
 
Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations set forth in SOR, which were based 
on her disclosure of that same information in Items 3 through 5. (Item 2.) Applicant=s 
admissions, and accompanying explanations, are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
                                                 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is the summary of an 
unsworn interview of Applicant prepared by an OPM investigator. Applicant was assisted by counsel in 
preparing her response to the FORM. She offered no objection to the admissibility of Item 4, which contains 
no adverse information that was not already disclosed by her in other admissible Items. Accordingly, Item 4 
is admitted into evidence and will be considered.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
On her first security clearance application, dated October 4, 2005, Applicant 
admitted that she had used marijuana five times between January 2000 and January 
2004. (Item 5.) Applicant also shared marijuana with her former boyfriend and two other 
friends on three or four occasions between 2005 and January 2011, after she had been 
granted a security clearance. She said that the use took place in the home she shared 
with the boyfriend, who was a more frequent marijuana user. He usually did not use it in 
her presence, but during each of the occasions when she used it, she inhaled its smoke 
one time through a bowl that was being passed around the group at their home. She did 
not purchase the drug, or have any other involvement with it. She knew that smoking it 
was illegal and incompatible with the eligibility requirements for a security clearance, so 
she decided never to do so again after the last incident in January 2011. Shortly 
thereafter her relationship with that boyfriend began deteriorating, in part due to 
arguments about his continuing marijuana use. They broke up in 2014, and have not 
spoken since. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4; AE A.) 
 
Applicant currently lives a clean and active lifestyle, including participation in 
sporting and community activities with a police officer, a firefighter, an employee of the 
Defense Intelligence Agency, a state government employee, and her daughter. She 
refused to follow advice from her former boyfriend and other friends, who encouraged her 
to lie about her drug involvement on her 2012 SF-86. She said: 
 
I was adamant that I had to tell the truth, which I did. I am embarrassed and 
mad and upset with myself that I have anything to admit to. I am smarter, 
wiser, stronger than the person who used, knowing it was wrong. My most 
important takeaway from this experience is that in the future, when my 
daughter is older, I can use myself as an example on the importance of 
honesty and leading a drug-free lifestyle. I hope to encourage her to make 
good decisions throughout her life. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters and emails from people who have known her 
in her personal and professional capacities for many years. They uniformly praised her 
exceptional work performance and outstanding character. Her performance evaluations 
from 2010 through 2014 reported that she either routinely exceeded corporate/client 
standards and job expectations, or substantially and consistently exceeded them 
throughout that period. (Item 2.)    
    
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG & 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG & 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The DCs raised by the evidence in this case are:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
Applicant admittedly used marijuana that was passed around by a group of her 
friends on three or four occasions between 2005 and January 2011. She had been 
granted a security clearance in 2005 that remained in effect. She had also used 
marijuana about five times during her teenage years. These facts support application of 
the foregoing DCs, shifting the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation of resulting security 
concerns. 
 
AG & 26 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. The facts in 
this case support application of two of them: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant=s abuse of marijuana was casual and occasional, in social settings with 
friends who were partaking. She voluntarily chose to stop such activity because she 
realized that it was inconsistent with her employment obligations, goals, and standards of 
behavior. Her use was removed in time and place from any work-related security 
concerns. Her honest admission of this error in judgment is the only evidence that it took 
place, and supports the credibility of her declared intention not to repeat such conduct. 
The drug abuse ended more than six years ago, and her compelling good-character 
evidence indicates that drug abuse is unlikely to recur. Substantial mitigation under AG & 
26(a) was accordingly established. 
 
Applicant is employed full time in a demanding professional position. She no 
longer engages in the personal relationships or activities where peer pressure to use 
drugs might exist. She has been abstinent since January 2011, and declared her intent 
 
 
6 
 
 
not to abuse drugs in the future. This evidence also establishes significant and 
persuasive mitigation under AG & 26(b). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16. Department Counsel 
argued that the evidence established the following DC (FORM at 2-3.):   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 The only allegation under Guideline E made direct reference to Applicant’s 
admitted drug involvement that was alleged under, and fully covered under the provisions 
of, Guideline H. The DOHA Appeal Board, however, has interpreted the language of AG ¶ 
16(d) broadly, so as not to exclude consideration of unreliable or untrustworthy behavior 
under Guideline E even though the conduct also falls squarely under another guideline. I 
have considered this aspect of the case and find that, other than Applicant’s admission of 
very minor drug abuse, there is no “available information” in this record that would support 
a whole-person assessment of any of the adverse characteristics cited in AG ¶ 19(d). 
Accordingly, my analysis under Guideline H applies equally to any Guideline E concerns. 
 
 I considered the applicability of one other DC under AG ¶ 16, even though 
Department Counsel did not assert that the evidence supported it: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana while holding a security clearance potentially made 
her vulnerable to exploitation or duress because it could have affected her professional 
 
 
7 
 
 
standing. She obviated this potential by freely disclosing her minor drug abuse, which 
ended more than six years ago. Any former security concerns under this DC were 
accordingly eliminated under the terms of AG ¶ 17(e).6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a sincere and 
mature individual, according to all record character evidence, with a consistent 
professional history of dedicated service to the United States. She accepted 
accountability for her earlier exercise of bad judgment in choosing to use marijuana on 
less than ten occasions, all of which occurred more than six years ago, and expressed her 
resolve to avoid similar conduct in the future. Her actions and lifestyle changes have 
substantially eliminated the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress, and make 
continuation or recurrence of security concerns unlikely. Overall, the record evidence 
creates no doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
                                                 
6 “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
or duress”. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
