 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01788 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 21, 2015. 
On September 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 7, 2015; answered it on September 
24, 2016; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
was ready to proceed on October 20, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on 
November 10, 2016. On November 18, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 5, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony 
of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through S, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until January 6, 2017, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX T and U, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 
13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c-1.h. He denied SOR ¶ 1.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old welder who has worked for a defense contractor since 
April 2002. He has held a security clearance for about 22 years. (Tr. 7.) 
 
Applicant married in December 1994 and divorced in November 2000. He 
married again August 2002, separated in January 2010, and divorced in July 2015. He 
has lived with a cohabitant since May 2012. He has no children.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1985, completed an apprentice 
program in December 1989 and was certified as a journeyman welder. He progressed 
to higher skill levels and became a nuclear pipe welder. He taught welding at a shipyard 
and received several promotions to supervisory positions. In 2008 he became a welding 
program manager, his current position. He has worked on a “tiger team,” whose 
members are “the best in their trade” and travel around the world to repair submarines 
and special operations equipment. (Tr. 30-33.) He has been recognized frequently for 
his proficiency, dedication, leadership, and workplace safety practices. (AX J-L; R, S.) 
 
A professional colleague, who is also Applicant’s landlord and a personal friend, 
testified that he has known Applicant for about ten years. He considers Applicant to be 
honest, reliable, and trustworthy. He testified, “I trust him with my back.” (Tr. 17-21.) A 
co-worker, who has known Applicant since the late 1980s, considers him financially 
responsible, honest, trustworthy, and reliable. (Tr. 28-30.) 
 
When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed several delinquent debts. His 
credit bureau reports (CBRs) from August 2015 (GX 2) and May 2016 (GX 3) reflect a 
delinquent second mortgage loan, charged off for $108,242 (SOR ¶ 1.a); two credit-card 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
accounts referred for collection of $1,582 and $1,510 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.c); and five 
delinquent medical bills for $69, $55, $32, $461, and $299 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h). 
 
Applicant and his wife separated in January 2010, and he moved out of the 
house. The separation and subsequent divorce were contentious and took five years to 
complete. On the advice of a lawyer, he paid his wife $1,300 per month while the 
divorce was pending. (Tr. 35-36.) He was unable to afford the payments to his wife and 
the payments on the first and second mortgages on the marital home. The lender 
foreclosed on the first mortgage in October 2010. (Tr. 35-37.) Applicant continued to 
make payments on the second mortgage until sometime in 2011. The debt was charged 
off for $108,242 in March 2015. (GX 2 at 3.)  
 
Applicant testified that he attempted to contact the lender for the second 
mortgage loan but he “didn’t know if they went out of business, or what.” (Tr. 37.) He did 
not state when, how often, or by what means he attempted to contact the lender, and he 
provided no documentation of his efforts. The August 2015 CBR lists a mailing address 
for the original lender, but the May 2016 CBR does not list any contact information for 
the lender who purchased the debt and is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (GX 3 at 1.)  
 
Applicant testified that he was unaware of the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR until a security investigator interviewed him in February and April 2016 and 
showed him his August 2015 CBR. (Tr. 40; GX 4 at 2.) He testified that, when he 
learned during these interviews that the delinquent second mortgage loan was charged 
off, he believed that the debt was cancelled and not required to be paid. (Tr. 44, 47.)  
 
All the debts alleged in the SOR became delinquent after Applicant’s marital 
breakup. He erroneously believed that his ex-wife had paid the credit card bills alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He was unaware of the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h, 
but he knew that his wife was covered by his medical insurance, and the bills were 
probably copayments for care she received. After the security investigator showed him 
the CBR reflecting the credit-card debts and medical bills, he still made no effort to pay 
or otherwise resolve them.  
 
Applicant hired a bankruptcy attorney in November 2016, completed the financial 
counseling required by the bankruptcy court, and filed a bankruptcy petition on 
December 27, 2016. Applicant testified that all the debts alleged in the SOR are 
included in the bankruptcy. (Tr. 38.) The record does not include the list of creditors 
included in the bankruptcy, and there is no evidence in the record reflecting that the 
case has progressed beyond the initial filing. (AX A; AX T.)  
 
Applicant has about $74,500 in his retirement account, but only about $20 in 
savings. (Tr. 46; AX C.) He recently began receiving copies of his credit reports 
regularly. He has no credit cards and no debts other than those listed in the SOR. (Tr. 
47.) His November 2016 CBR reflects no new debts or adverse information. (AX D.) He 
has a clean driving record and no criminal record. (AX F; AX U.) He is current on his 
federal and state income taxes. (AX G-I.) His net monthly income is about $4,650, and 
 
4 
 
his monthly expenses are about $3,447, leaving a net monthly remainder of about 
$1,202. (AX S.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 
5 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s separation and divorce and the 
credit-card debts and medical bills incurred by his ex-wife after the separation were 
conditions largely beyond his control. There is no evidence in the record reflecting 
whether Applicant depended on his ex-wife’s income to cover the debts related to the 
marital home or their living expenses. However, he has not acted responsibly. He 
stopped paying the second mortgage loan in 2011. He testified that he was unable to 
contact the lender, but his testimony about his attempts to contact the lender was 
vague, unspecific, unsupported by documentary evidence, and unconvincing. He 
plausibly and credibly testified that he believed that a charged-off debt was cancelled. 
However, he has not credibly explained why he took no significant action to resolve the 
delinquent mortgage loan between 2011 and the security interviews in 2016, when he 
first learned that the debt was charged off. He also has not explained his failure to 
address the other debts alleged in the SOR after he learned about them during his 
interviews with the security investigator in February and April 2016. His eventual contact 
with a bankruptcy attorney did not occur until he received the SOR and his hearing was 
imminent. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully established. Applicant recently completed the counseling 
required by the bankruptcy court, but his recent bankruptcy petition falls short of “clear 
indications” that his financial problems are being resolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. This mitigating condition requires a showing of 
good faith. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated 
by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Although 
Applicant was alerted in February 2016 that his delinquent debts raised security 
concerns, he took no significant action to resolve his delinquent debts until his hearing 
was imminent. While bankruptcy is a lawful and sometimes prudent course of action, it 
does not constitute a “good-faith” effort to resolve delinquent debts. See ISCR Case No. 
03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). Furthermore, Applicant’s bankruptcy is in its infancy, 
and Applicant has not had sufficient time to establish a track record of compliance with 
a Chapter 13 payment plan. 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F* in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for 22 years. He is highly skilled, 
respected, and has made significant contributions to national security. His acrimonious 
separation and divorce triggered his financial problems. However, he paid little attention 
to his financial situation after 2011 and did not exercise due diligence to resolve his 
financial problems until he realized that his security clearance was in jeopardy. While 
his recent bankruptcy filing offers him a route to financial stability, insufficient time has 
passed to determine whether he will be able to obtain a confirmed Chapter 13 payment 
plan and establish a track record of compliance with that plan.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
