 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 Redacted )  ISCR Case No. 16-00621 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana with varying frequency from 2009 to March 2015. He 
purchased marijuana and sold it on occasion to recoup his personal costs for the drug. He 
used the stimulants MDMA and cocaine seven times each and the hallucinogen psilocybin 
twice. He does not intend any future illegal drug involvement, but he has not fully mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his marijuana involvement and his ongoing association with 
known drug users. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On June 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and explaining why it was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him security clearance eligibility. The DOD 
CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
 
 
 2 
1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on July 26, 2016, and he requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. On 
September 20, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On September 27, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for October 19, 
2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and one 
Applicant exhibit (AE A) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on October 27, 2016. 
 
I held the record open for three weeks after the hearing for Applicant to submit 
additional documents. On November 9, 2016, Applicant forwarded a letter of 
recommendation (AE B) and a report of a drug screen (AE C). The Government had no 
objection to their admissibility, and AEs B and C were accepted into the record. 
 
Summary of Pleadings 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency, at times daily, from approximately 2009 to 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a), MDMA (Ecstasy) 
from approximately February 2012 to March 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d), cocaine from approximately 
October 2012 to July 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.e), and psilocybin (hallucinogenic mushrooms) from 
approximately May 2011 to April 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.f). Also under Guideline H, Applicant is 
alleged to have purchased marijuana regularly and sold it weekly from approximately 2009 
to 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.b). A marijuana possession charge in May 2014 is alleged under 
Guideline H (SOR ¶ 1.c) and cross-alleged under Guideline J (SOR ¶ 2.a). Additionally, 
Applicant is alleged under Guideline E to continue to associate with friends who use illegal 
drugs (SOR ¶ 3.a). 
 
When he responded to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had used marijuana as 
alleged. He denied the purchase and sale of marijuana as alleged, and explained that he 
sold marijuana only for six months, which occurred between September 2011 and August 
2012. While he acknowledged purchasing marijuana from 2009 to 2015, at times regularly, 
he indicated that he bought the drug only one time after May 2014. Applicant admitted that 
he had been charged with marijuana possession as alleged in May 2014, but the charge 
had been dropped and expunged from his record. Applicant admitted that he had used 
MDMA and cocaine each seven times, primarily between February 2012 and March 2013 
for MDMA and between October 2012 and May 2013 for cocaine. Applicant denied the 
alleged psilocybin use in that he had used the drug only twice; in May 2011 and November 
2012. Applicant denied the criminal conduct allegation, contending that he does not have a 
criminal record. He admitted the Guideline E allegation but questioned its nexus to the 
personal conduct security concern. 
 
 
 3 
Ruling on Procedure 
 
 Based on a county circuit court order of November 20, 2015, expunging the police 
and court records relating to the drug charge (SOR ¶ 2.a), Applicant moved for dismissal of 
the Guideline J allegation over the Government’s objection. While the DOHA administrative 
judge may rule on questions of procedure under Directive ¶ E3.10 and may amend the 
SOR at the hearing to conform to the evidence under Directive ¶ E3.1.17, authority to 
withdraw SOR allegations rests with Department Counsel under ¶ E3.1.6. Furthermore, a 
local court’s expungement order does not bar the federal government from considering the 
security implications of the underlying conduct that led to the criminal charge subject to the 
expungement order. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12678 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 7, 2007). 
Accordingly, I denied the motion. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old contracts specialist with a bachelor’s degree awarded in 
May 2013. He began working for his employer, a defense contractor, in June 2013. He has 
been in his present position since June 2015. (GEs 1, 2; AE A.) He does not currently hold, 
nor has he previously held a security clearance with his employer. (GE 1.) 
 
In October 2009, approximately one month into his freshman year of college, 
Applicant accepted an offer of marijuana because he was curious. He enjoyed the drug’s 
relaxing effect on him, and he continued to use the drug at least twice a week and 
sometimes daily throughout college. Applicant purchased marijuana with varying 
frequency, at times regularly, for his personal consumption starting in December 2009. 
Most of his purchases were in small quantity, but he also bought an ounce or more on 
occasion. (Tr. 24.) During the first semester of his junior year of college (September 2011 
to December 2011) and the summer following his junior year (June 2012 to August 2012), 
Applicant sold marijuana to friends on a weekly basis to defray his costs for the drug. (GEs 
1, 2; Tr. 35-36.) Applicant was living off campus with several others. He explained that it 
made sense to them to purchase in larger quantities together and sell “a little bit” of their 
extra on weekends to other friends who offered approximately $20 for the drug. Applicant 
indicated that he sold marijuana to recover his costs and not for profit. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Applicant purchased and used psilocybin (hallucinogenic mushrooms) on two 
occasions. He tried the drug out of curiosity in May 2011 and used it a second time, in 
November 2012, because he had a good experience the first time. Applicant purchased 
and used MDMA five times at concerts between February 2012 and March 2013. He used 
cocaine six times in college between October 2012 and May 2013. He bought cocaine for 
his personal consumption on two occasions between October 2012 and January 2013. 
(GEs 1, 2; Tr. 32-34.) He purchased a gram of cocaine for $80-$100. (Tr. 33.) Applicant 
knew that the use of illegal drugs was prohibited on his college campus (Tr. 27), and that 
he could have been expelled for selling drugs. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 4 
Applicant graduated from college in May 2013, and in June 2013, he moved to 
another region of the country to work for his current employer. He used marijuana 15 to 20 
times and purchased marijuana occasionally after he started his defense contractor 
employment, in disregard of his employer’s drug policy. Applicant used marijuana in 
various circumstances, i.e., while visiting friends from college, at concerts, at parties, with 
new friends. (Tr. 44.) Applicant understood that his employer could drug test him at any 
time if his job performance was suffering; that he could be disciplined if found to be under 
the influence of drugs or alcohol; and that there were programs “if they deemed [drug use] 
not to be as serious.” (Tr. 41-42.) Applicant explained that he did not think that he would 
hold his job long enough to require a clearance or that he would be placed in a position 
requiring a security clearance. (Tr. 43.) 
 
In May 2014, Applicant was issued a criminal citation for possession of marijuana.1 
(GE 1; AE A.) Four or five police officers approached him as he was leaving a park around 
the corner from his apartment. They had observed him smoking marijuana, and they 
discovered a marijuana cigarette in the parking lot near his vehicle. Applicant admitted to 
the officers that it was his marijuana. (Tr. 30-31.) He had smoked marijuana before he was 
approached by the police. (Tr. 46.) Applicant pleaded not guilty, and the charge was nolle 
prosequi in October 2014.2 On Applicant’s motion, the police and court records relating to 
the criminal charge were expunged in November 2015.3 (AE A.) 
                                                 
1 Applicant submits that he was issued a criminal citation rather than arrested. (Tr. 31.) AE A, the order 
expunging the charge, repeatedly references his arrest for possession of marijuana. The police records, which 
could clarify the issue, are not before me for review. Criminal conduct security concerns are established if the 
underlying conduct proves illegal drug possession, irrespective of whether an applicant is handcuffed and 
taken to the police station for booking, issued a criminal citation ordering him to appear in court, or the charge 
is dismissed or expunged. See AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” 
  
2 Applicant testified that he was found not guilty in court. (Tr. 31.) The expungement order indicates that the 
case was resolved by nolle prosequi on October 18, 2014. (AE A.) 
 
3 Authority for the expungement is set forth in § 19.2-392.2 of the pertinent state statutes, which provides in 
relevant part: 
 
A. If a person is charged with the commission of a crime or any offense defined in Title 18.2, 
and 
1. Is acquitted, or 
2. A nolle prosequi is taken or the charge is otherwise dismissed, including dismissal by 
accord and satisfaction pursuant to § 19.2-151, he may file a petition setting forth the relevant 
facts and requesting expungement of the police records and the court records relating to the 
charge. . .  
 
F. After receiving the criminal history record information from the CCRE, the court shall 
conduct a hearing on the petition. If the court finds that the continued existence and possible 
dissemination of information relating to the arrest of the petitioner causes or may cause 
circumstances which constitute a manifest injustice to the petitioner, it shall ender an order 
requiring the expungement of the police and court records, including electronic records, 
relating to the charge. Otherwise, it shall deny the petition. However, if the petitioner has no 
prior criminal record and the arrest was for a misdemeanor violation, the petitioner shall be 
entitled, in the absence of good cause shown to the contrary by the Commonwealth, to 
expungement of the police and court records relating to the charge, and the court shall enter 
 
 5 
In June 2014, Applicant was transferred by his employer to a work location not far 
from his college. He used cocaine one more time, in July 2014. He purchased and used 
MDMA twice after college, the last time in March 2015. After Applicant resolved to stop 
using marijuana as a result of his court appearance in October 2014, he used marijuana at 
least once in March 2015 at a reunion of his college singing group. At his hearing, he 
explained that he was celebrating at a party after a show, that there was excessive alcohol 
involved, and that he accepted an offer of marijuana. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
In June 2015, Applicant began his current position at work (AE A), which was 
apparently a promotion for him. (Tr. 60.) On August 31, 2015, Applicant completed and 
certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
application for a DOD security clearance. He responded affirmatively to police record 
inquiries and indicated that he had been arrested for alleged use of marijuana in May 2014, 
but the case against him was dismissed and that charge was in the process of being 
expunged. In response to inquiries concerning any illegal use of drugs or controlled 
substances in the last seven years, Applicant disclosed that he smoked marijuana between 
October 2009 and March 2015. He stated, “Smoked recreationally multiple times a week 
during college, only occasionally after college.” He also disclosed that he used 
hallucinogenic mushrooms twice in college; that he used MDMA at concerts seven times 
total between February 2012 and March 2015; and that he used cocaine seven times 
between October 2012 and July 2014. Applicant indicated with respect to each drug that he 
did not intend any future use because he understood it could jeopardize his security 
clearance eligibility. Applicant also responded “Yes” to an inquiry into any illegal purchase 
or sale in the last seven years. He reported that he “bought marijuana to smoke” between 
December 2009 and March 2015 “regularly during college and infrequently following 
graduation.” Applicant disclosed that during the first semester of his junior year of college 
and the summer following his junior year, he sold excess marijuana to recoup his costs. He 
added that twice during his sophomore year, he gave money to a friend so that he could 
buy marijuana to sell. Applicant also listed his purchases of MDMA, cocaine, and 
hallucinogenic mushrooms for his personal consumption. (GE 1.) 
 
On December 1, 2015, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant provided some detail about his 
illegal drug use, purchase, and sales. Applicant is reported to have told the investigator that 
he purchased marijuana in amounts of an ounce or more. Regarding the May 2014 drug 
offense, Applicant reportedly refused to disclose to the investigator what he was doing in 
the park. Applicant told the investigator that two officers claimed to have observed him 
smoking marijuana based on the remains of a marijuana cigarette on the ground about 10-
15 feet away from him. Applicant denied he was arrested, but acknowledged that he was 
issued a criminal citation for illegal possession of marijuana. He refused to state whether 
                                                                                                                                                             
an order of expungement. 
 
The circuit court judgment issued an expungement order in Applicant’s case on a finding that the continued 
existence and possible dissemination of information relating to his arrest causes or may cause circumstances 
that constitute a manifest injustice to him. (AE A.) 
 
 
 6 
he had used marijuana on that occasion. He explained that the charge was dismissed by 
the court with no finding of guilt. Applicant denied any likelihood of recurrence of any 
criminal drug involvement and indicated that he had no intent to use or purchase 
marijuana, psilocybin, MDMA, or cocaine in the future. He expressed disinterest in using 
psilocybin, MDMA, and cocaine. While he no longer associated with persons who use 
psilocybin, Applicant acknowledged that he associates with persons who use marijuana, 
MDMA, and cocaine, although he reportedly declined to provide information about his 
associates who use illegal drugs, including the names, times, or locations where he 
associates with known drug users. (GE 2.) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant clarified that while he had told the OPM investigator that he 
had purchased marijuana in quantity of an ounce or more, it was in response to inquiry 
concerning the largest amount ever purchased. Most of his purchases were “in extremely 
small quantities, much, much well and below an ounce or more.” (Tr. 24.) About his use of 
drugs after college, Applicant indicated that it took some time “to break out of that college 
mind-set;” that he found himself in situations, at parties or otherwise, where he would use 
drugs. He asserted that he has avoided situations conducive to drug use after he realized 
that such situations were hindering his personal and professional growth. (Tr. 40.) 
Concerning his reported ongoing association with people who use illegal drugs, Applicant 
testified: 
 
I would like to point out the large majority of those people are not in my day-
to-day life, these are, again, friends from college, the large majority of whom 
live in [city name omitted]. The friends that I do associate with on a regular 
basis do not use drugs. . . . 
 
 Applicant denies any intent to use illegal drugs in the future. His asserts that his 
“youthful curiosity” that led him to try MDMA, cocaine, and psilocybin has been “satisfied.” 
(Tr. 32.) Applicant explained that he had not considered the possible future impacts of such 
drug use when he was in college, but his position has given him a “greater appreciation 
and respect for the severity and responsibility that comes with a security clearance.” (Tr. 
25.) He acknowledged that he continues to associate with individuals “that do occasionally 
use drugs,” but he denied using illegal drugs with them. He admitted that he has 
“sometimes” been in the presence of persons smoking marijuana since March 2015 (Tr. 
28), although he claims he cannot recall the last time. He does not believe he was around 
anyone smoking marijuana in 2016. (Tr. 45-46.) Applicant has told his friends that he 
cannot use illegal drugs because he has applied for a DOD security clearance. (Tr. 50.) 
  
 As of October 2016, Applicant had recently become engaged. He lives with his 
fiancée. They used marijuana together on occasion in the past, most recently in 2014. (Tr. 
45.) Applicant attests that drug use was “a rare occurrence” for his fiancée, who does not 
use drugs. (Tr. 45.) Most of his current socialization involves other couples or going out to 
dinner. He no longer finds himself in situations conducive to drug use, nor does he have 
any desire to continue using illegal drugs. (Tr. 38.) He understands that he would stand to 
lose security clearance eligibility for any drug use and that the rules in that regard are “non-
 
 7 
negotiable.” He described himself as “a foolish college kid that has since grown up quite 
substantially.” (Tr. 39.) 
 
On October 28, 2016, Applicant took a random drug screen, which was negative for 
all substances tested, including amphetamines, cocaine, marijuana, opiates, and 
phencyclidine. (AE C.) Applicant has never been diagnosed as drug dependent. (Tr. 39.)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor since June 2015 provided a character reference for him. She 
described Applicant as a pleasure to manage. He has demonstrated excellent judgment 
and professional behavior at work with no incidents. She believes he can be trusted with a 
security clearance. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
 
 8 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),4 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant used marijuana mostly 
twice a week but also daily at times while in college between October 2009 and May 2013, 
and 15 to 20 times after college. His last use occurred in March 2015 during a reunion of 
his college singing group. Applicant also used the hallucinogen psilocybin twice, in May 
2011 and again in November 2012; cocaine six times in college between October 2012 and 
May 2013 and once after college in July 2014; and the stimulant MDMA five times at 
concerts between February 2012 and March 2015, including twice after college. AG ¶ 
25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, 
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” is established because Applicant 
purchased marijuana on a regular basis in college and occasionally after college to as 
recently as March 2015.5 He bought psilocybin and cocaine two times and MDMA 
                                                 
4Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. 
 
5 Applicant indicated in response to the SOR that he purchased marijuana only one time between May 2014 
and March 2015. He listed on his SF 86 that he bought marijuana between December 2009 and March 2015. 
Applicant did not elaborate about his last purchase in March 2015, although his account of his use in March 
2015 that he partook of marijuana offered to him does not suggest the premeditation associated with 
purchase. 
 
 9 
approximately seven times between February 2012 and March 2015. Additionally, 
Applicant purchased a larger quantity of marijuana (an ounce or more) in college with the 
intent of selling to friends to recoup his costs. Applicant sold marijuana to friends during the 
fall of his junior year (September 2011 to December 2011) and the next summer (June 
2012 to August 2012). Applicant did not seek to profit from the drug, but his sales to friends 
implicate application of the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 25(c). 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies 
in part. His use of psilocybin was limited to twice in college. His involvement with cocaine 
and MDMA was likewise infrequent, although he used cocaine a year into his defense 
contractor employment and MDMA only five months before he applied for a DOD security 
clearance. It is even more difficult to apply AG ¶ 26(a) to his marijuana involvement, given 
his regular abuse of the drug in college and 15-20 times after he began his defense 
contractor employment, including after he was criminally cited for illegal possession. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future” may be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has used any illegal drug since his last use of 
marijuana and MDMA in March 2015. He reports a lack of interest in ever using cocaine, 
psilocybin, or MDMA again. Applying for a DOD security clearance appears to have been a 
primary motivator in him resolving to forego any future marijuana use. Yet, Applicant 
admits that he continues to associate with individuals who occasionally use illegal drugs 
such as marijuana, cocaine, and MDMA. Applicant’s unrebutted but also uncorroborated 
testimony is that he has advised his friends that he cannot use illegal drugs again because 
he is applying for a security clearance, but AG ¶ 26(b)(1) does not apply as long as he 
continues to associate with known drug users. As for AG ¶ 26(b)(2), Applicant is no longer 
in the college environment, where his drug use was at its heaviest. However, Applicant did 
not stop his drug use after he graduated. He used marijuana in a variety of circumstances, 
including with new friends, after he moved to a new area and began working for a defense 
contractor. His recent engagement and cohabitation with his fiancée minimize the risk of 
future drug involvement somewhat. He smoked marijuana with his fiancée in the past, but it 
was also atypical behavior for his fiancée. Most of Applicant’s current socialization is with 
other couples and does not involve illegal drugs. Yet, he has sometimes been in the 
 
 10 
presence of persons using marijuana since March 2015, so the change in environment 
does not guarantee against future drug abuse. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b)(3), “an appropriate period of abstinence,” is not yet established with 
respect to his marijuana involvement, even though he no longer knowingly places himself 
in situations where marijuana is present.6 He obviously enjoyed the drug, using it on the 
weekends and at times daily in college. Apparently he and his cohabitants in college made 
large purchases of marijuana in the fall of 2011 and the summer of 2012, and then sold 
some of that marijuana to other friends to recoup their costs. Applicant sold marijuana 
knowing that he could have been disciplined and perhaps even expelled from his college 
for selling marijuana. He continued to smoke marijuana while working for his current 
employer, including at least one time after he had appeared in court on a marijuana 
possession charge. His abstinence of approximately 18 months as of his hearing in 
October 2016 is relatively short in relation to his extensive history with the drug. AG ¶ 
26(b)(3) is satisfied with respect to his involvement with MDMA, psilocybin, and cocaine. 
Applicant disclosed that he used MDMA as recently as March 2015, and the circumstances 
of that abuse are not clear. Nonetheless, his use of that drug was situational, primarily or 
exclusively at concerts, and is not likely to reoccur. Similarly, he did not elaborate about his 
use of cocaine in July 2014, but I am persuaded that he has no interest in using cocaine 
again. His use of psilocybin did not continue after college. 
 
 Applicant indicated on his SF 86 that he does not intend to use any illegal drug in 
the future because he understands that any drug abuse could jeopardize him holding a 
security clearance. While he has not executed a separate statement of intent expressly 
acknowledging automatic revocation of security clearance eligibility for any illegal drug 
involvement, he clearly understands that the rules prohibiting drug use by persons holding 
a security clearance are “non-negotiable,” and he intends to abide by those rules. AG ¶ 
26(b)(4) applies. It is troubling that, whether due to excessive alcohol consumption, peer 
pressure, or a combination of circumstances, Applicant used and purchased marijuana and 
MDMA after he had resolved in 2014 to stop using drugs, and he had been given a second 
chance by a prosecutor who agreed not to prosecute the May 2014 marijuana charge. 
Applicant provided little detail about the frequency and circumstances of him being in the 
presence of others using illegal drugs since March 2015. His change to a drug-free lifestyle 
is relatively recent. While he does not associate with drug users regularly, he has not made 
a clean break with his drug-abusing past by continuing to maintain friendships with known 
drug users. A lengthier period of abstention is required before I can confidently conclude 
that he is not likely to use or purchase marijuana again. The drug involvement security 
concerns are not fully mitigated. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern about criminal conduct is articulated in AG ¶ 30: 
                                                 
6 The Appeal Board has not established a “bright line” rule for determining whether drug use is recent. As 
stated by the Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 14-01847 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015), “The extent to which 
security concerns may have been attenuated through the passage of time is a question that must be resolved 
based on the evidence as a whole.” 
 
 11 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The criminal conduct concerns are established by Applicant’s May 2014 marijuana 
possession charge. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted,” applies, notwithstanding that the state agreed to a nolle prosequi of the charge 
in October 2014 and his records were expunged in November 2015. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal 
behavior happened; or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” does not apply despite the isolated nature of the criminal charge. Applicant had 
possession of marijuana on a regular basis in college, bought it repeatedly, and even sold 
the drug to friends.7 
 
 Expungement of the police and court records resulting from the May 2014 criminal 
citation does not necessarily establish AG ¶ 32(c), “evidence that the person did not 
commit the offense.” Applicant would not tell the OPM investigator what he had been doing 
in the park before the police approached him in May 2014. He reported that the police 
claimed to have seen him smoke a marijuana cigarette that was on the ground 10-15 feet 
away, and he refused to state whether or not he had used marijuana on that occasion. 
Applicant now acknowledges that he had smoked marijuana on that occasion and that he 
had admitted to the police that the marijuana cigarette belonged to him. 
 
 A good employment record is evidence of reform that can be considered under AG ¶ 
32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” 
Applicant was promoted at work, and he has demonstrated professionalism and dedication 
on the job. He has given his current supervisor no reason to doubt his ability to handle 
classified material appropriately. Applicant’s contributions to his defense contractor 
employer implicate AG ¶ 32(d). Yet, the risk of any future criminal conduct depends largely 
on whether he continues to abstain from illegal drug involvement. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
                                                 
7 The Appeal Board has long held that the administrative judge may consider non-alleged conduct to assess 
an applicant’s credibility; to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to decide 
whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or to provide evidence for a whole-
person analysis under Section 6.3 of the Directive. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 09-07219 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012). 
 
 
 12 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. 
 
 Applicant candidly disclosed during his OPM interview in December 2015 that he 
continued to associate with friends who use marijuana and cocaine on occasion. As of his 
hearing in October 2016, he had not terminated his relationships with these persons, 
although he indicated that he has told them that he cannot use any illegal drugs because 
he is seeking security clearance eligibility. AG ¶ 16(d), ¶ 16(e), and ¶ 16(g) are implicated 
to a greater or less extent. They provide: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to  exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standings; and 
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 As a threshold matter, the DOD is not in the business of dictating a person’s 
friendships or associations. Applicant has no control over his college friends’ decisions to 
use illegal drugs. However, Applicant shows poor judgment and risks relapse into drug 
abuse when he continues those associations. More than two years into his defense 
contractor employment, he was in the presence of known drug users while they were 
actively using. Applicant has shown some willingness to change this aspect of his social life 
by informing these friends that he cannot use any illegal drugs. He testified that most of his 
drug-using friends live in another state and that his day-to-day social interaction is couples-
based with his cohabitant fiancée, who was a rare user of marijuana in the past and does 
not currently use illegal drugs. Two mitigating conditions have partial applicability under AG 
¶ 17, as follows: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 13 
 
Applicant has reduced his vulnerability somewhat, but not enough is known about the 
frequency and circumstances of his contacts with his drug-abusing friends. The personal 
conduct security concerns raised by his association with known users of illegal drugs are 
not yet fully mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).8 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
to consider Applicant’s very poor judgment in abusing illegal drugs. Some of his disregard 
for the laws concerning the use of controlled substances can be explained by youth and 
the college environment. However, Applicant’s involvement with MDMA, cocaine, and 
marijuana after he started his defense contractor employment is inconsistent with the 
sound judgment that must be demanded of him should he be entrusted with classified 
information. He used cocaine more than a year into his defense contractor employment 
and MDMA and marijuana some 21 months into his job. 
 
Applicant’s disclosures about his drug involvement weigh in his favor under the 
whole-person evaluation. Yet, he also exhibited some reluctance to admit to the use of 
marijuana that led to the criminal charge against him in May 2014, to provide details about 
his association with drug users, and to explain the extent and circumstances under which 
he found himself in the presence of others using illegal drugs since March 2015. About his 
last use of marijuana in March 2015, he testified that he partook of the drug while partying 
at a reunion of his college singing group. He indicated that excessive alcohol was involved, 
but he had reported on his SF 86 that he purchased marijuana in March 2015, which 
suggests some premeditation. 
 
Applicant has earned the trust of his supervisor, who commented about his 
professionalism and dedication at work. While Applicant exhibited some remorse at his 
hearing for his past drug abuse, he also wants to continue his friendships with drug users 
while asserting that his lifestyle is no longer conducive to drug involvement. It is well settled 
that once a security concern arises, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
continuation of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). At some future date, Applicant may well be able 
                                                 
8The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 14 
to demonstrate the judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness necessary to overcome the 
security concerns raised by his years of illegal drug involvement. For the reasons already 
discussed, I am not yet able to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f: For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
