1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01194 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on July 28, 
2015. On July 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 18, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 15, 2016. I was assigned the case on October 28, 2016. On November 9, 
2016, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for December 6, 2016. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered two 
exhibits which were admitted as Government (Gov) Exhibits 1 and 2. Government 
Exhibit 2 is the summary of Applicant’s background investigation interview summarized  
by the investigator who interviewed him. Applicant did not object to Government Exhibit 
2 subject to some clarifications to the summary of the interview. Applicant offered four 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – D, without objection. The 
2 
 
transcript was received on December 14, 2016. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b, but denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old consultant for a DOD contractor who seeks a security 
clearance. He is a project management expert. He has been employed as a consultant 
with the DOD contractor since May 2014. This is his first time applying for a security 
clearance. He attended college, but did not receive a degree. He is single, but in a 
committed relationship. He has a 20-year-old daughter from a previous marriage. (Tr. 
17, 22, 26-28, 12-13, 24; Gov 1) (Note: The facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, or locations in order to protect Applicant and 
his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information.)  
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant admits to using marijuana from January 1976 to the summer 2016.  In 
response to Section 23 of his security clearance application, dated July 28, 2015, Illegal  
Use of Drugs or Controlled Substances, Applicant listed that he used marijuana from 
approximately January 1976 to March 2015. He indicated it was “Occasional social use. 
Have abstained for approximately the last five months.”  He listed the frequency of the 
use as “Infrequent use. Occasional weekends. 2-3 times per month prior to March/April 
2015.” (Tr. 38; Gov 1, section 23, at 30)  
 
Applicant indicated on his security clearance application that he did not intend to 
use marijuana in the future. He explained further in the comments section: 
 
Given the de-criminalization of Marijuana in my state and the current wave 
of legalization in other states I do not consider this use to be of 
significance and equate it to the use of alcohol. However, I would commit 
to abstain from use if this use should in any way put my security clearance 
in jeopardy.  
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that he has been open and honest during 
the security clearance process. He considers his drug use to be occasional and 
infrequent. His significant other has maintained a clean and sober lifestyle for the past 
seven years. Applicant claims that there were periods in his life where he used 
marijuana on average of one to three times per month, and periods where he abstained 
from marijuana use for over six months to a year. (Tr. 24-26)  
 
Applicant’s regular use of marijuana occurred primarily in high school or college 
from 1977 to 1983. When he left college, he used marijuana on the weekends between 
two to three times a month. Applicant was in a band. He used marijuana at home or with 
his band. He usually received marijuana from one of his bandmates. He occasionally 
paid for it.  In 1990, Applicant started working full-time and his use decreased to once a 
3 
 
month.  In 1995, his use was reduced to every other month. He used marijuana for 
personal relaxation. Since 2006, Applicant used marijuana once every other month, but 
often less than that. Applicant credits his reduction in use to maturity, work, and family 
responsibilities. (Tr. 29-38) 
 
Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred during his summer vacation in 2016. 
He was at home by himself. He took a couple of hits off a marijuana joint. This occurred 
after he submitted his security clearance application in July 2015, and after he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in February 2016. When asked whether he 
was aware that his summer 2016 marijuana use could have an impact on his security 
clearance, Applicant mentioned that he was not certain that the security clearance 
investigation would ever conclude based on the length of time it was taking to complete. 
He was also not aware that his marijuana use could have an adverse impact on his 
security clearance. He is aware that the use of marijuana is illegal under federal law. 
Marijuana use is legal in the state where he resides. (Tr. 38-43) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant signed a statement of intent to refrain from illegal 
drug use. The statement acknowledged that Applicant’s security clearance would be 
revoked if he used illegal drugs. (AE D) 
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his resume and details of the duties of his position. 
He has had a long successful career and is an expert in his career field. (AE A – AE C) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (E.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
AG & 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
5 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1976 to the summer of 
2016. He occasionally purchased marijuana for his personal use. AG & 25(a) and AG & 
25(c) apply.   
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
  
AG & 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because of Applicant’s long history of marijuana use. 
His most recent use occurred after he submitted his security clearance application and 
after he was interviewed for his background investigation interview. Applicant has a 
relaxed attitude towards marijuana use and appears to be only willing to stop using 
marijuana as a condition of being granted a security clearance. While he does not use 
marijuana on a regular basis, his recent use is sufficient to raise concerns about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 Although Applicant provided a signed statement of intent to refrain from 
marijuana use, I give this document little weight considering Applicant’s expressed 
attitude towards marijuana as well as his recent use. While Applicant has reduced the 
frequency of his marijuana usage as he matured, he has not demonstrated an 
appropriate period of abstinence. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s professional 
qualifications. I considered his honesty in regard to his illegal marijuana use. However, 
Applicant continues to use illegal drugs as a mature adult. I considered that his last use 
of marijuana occurred in the summer of 2016, after he submitted his security clearance 
application, and after he was interviewed about his illegal drug use during his 
background investigation interview. His recent intention to refrain from illegal drug use is 
given less weight based on the recent illegal marijuana use.  Concerns raised by 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
