                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 16-00306
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 22, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) March 23, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On June 9, 2016, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 26, 2016, and he requested a hearing
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge.  This case was
assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 3, 2016.  A notice of hearing was
issued on November 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 12, 2016.  At the
hearing the Government presented three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 3, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented no exhibits. 
He testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on
December 30, 2016, to allow the Applicant to submit supporting documentation as well
as a written closing argument.  Applicant submitted nine additional documents, admitted
without objection as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A through I, including a written
closing argument dated December 30, 2016.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on December 20, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 51 years old, and never married.  He has a Master’s degree in
Electrical Engineering.  He is currently employed as a Senior Principal Electrical
Engineer with a defense contractor and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in
connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has failed to meet financial obligations
that indicate a lack of judgment and also unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations
which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.      
Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011
through 2014.  Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit reports of the Applicant dated April
7, 2015; and August 28, 2016, which include all three credit reporting agencies, reflect
state and Federal tax liens that have been imposed on the Applicant.  (Government
Exhibits 2 and 3.)  Applicant has been working for his current employer since February
2015.  He has not held a security clearance since 1996/1997.  
In his security clearance interview in November 2015, Applicant admitted that
since 2006 to the present, he has not filed his income tax returns in a timely fashion. 
(Tr. p. 19.)  His excuse for this was that he has been overwhelmed.  He had been doing
his own income tax returns, using a tax preparation software.  His income tax returns
have become more complicated over the years, and he did not make the time to meet
with an accountant to get the help he needed.  He explained that over the past five
years, his time has been committed to working several different jobs, entailing contract
work, in faraway locations, requiring constant moving, where he has been separated
from his records, and instead of focusing on his taxes, he has been focused on job
search while he was unemployed.  In addition, he has been busy managing his rental
properties, which include filling vacancies, dealing with tenants and maintenance. 
(Tr.pp. 15-19.) 
2
Applicant states that he and his accountant are currently working on his 2012,
2013 and 2014 income tax returns.  (Tr. p. 16.)  Applicant filed his 2011 Federal and two
different state income tax returns on October 15, 2016, two days before the hearing. 
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits B through I.)  Applicant states that when he has filed
his returns, he usually receives a refund.  He argues that his failure to file his income tax
returns has nothing to do with his inability to pay his taxes, it simply shows negligence
and a lack of due diligence to get the job done.  He hopes to get caught up with his
income tax return filing soon, and plans to maintain timeliness in his future filings.  (Tr.
pp. 15-16.)    
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
19.(g) failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as required
or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
3
     b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
4
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that Applicant has failed to file his Federal and State income
tax returns in a timely fashion since 2006.  For ten years, he has been busy and
focused on other things instead of complying with Federal and State law that requires
him to filed annual income tax returns.  His failure to file his income tax returns suggests
that he has a problem abiding by well-established Government rules and regulations. 
Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for protecting classified
information.  He has known for sometime that the Defense Department has been
concerned about this problem, and he has done little to remedy it.  To file them now
only shows that he has been strong-armed to do so by the Defense Department, and
undercuts any determination that he has shown good faith in doing so.            
Applicant’s conduct shows negligence and a lack of due diligence.  Furthermore,
his repeated failure to file his Federal tax returns in a timely manner does not
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons
granted access to classified information.  This pattern of unreliability demonstrates that
he has not met his burden of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance. 
Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Condition 19.(g)
failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as required or the
fraudulent filing of the same applies.  It can be argued that Mitigating Condition 20.(b)
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances applies.  However, this mitigating condition is not controlling.  Just
because Applicant has been busy with other matters, is not a viable excuse for failing to
comply with the laws of this country.  In this case, none of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
5
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, supports a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects his repeated failure to file his income tax returns have on his ability to safeguard
classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has not overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
 
Subpara.  1.a.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.b      Against the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.c.          Against the Applicant.
                 
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
6
