 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01701 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Kenya. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002. He 
has numerous family members who are citizens and residents of Kenya. He has a 
current Kenyan passport that he uses to travel to and from Kenya. Applicant failed to 
present sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign preference and foreign influence 
security concerns resulting from his connections to Kenya. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 14, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.  
 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR in writing on July 18, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 19, 2016, and issued a Notice of 
Hearing on September 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 19, 2016. The 
hearing convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered one exhibit (AE) A. All exhibits were admitted 
without objections. The record closed at the end of the hearing. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant did not specifically admit or deny the facts alleged in the SOR in his 
Answer. During his testimony, he admitted all facts alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 13-14.) His 
admissions, including those made in a December 21, 2015 Counterintelligence Focused 
Security Screening Questionnaire (CFSSC) and Interview, are incorporated as findings 
of fact. (GE 3.)  
 
Applicant, age 46, was born in Kenya in 1969. He was raised in Kenya and 
attended high school there. In 1995 he immigrated to the United States, having won a 
residency green card through a lottery. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 
2002. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1996 to 2000, at which time he 
received an honorable discharge as a petty officer 3rd class, and transferred to the U.S. 
Navy Reserve where he served until 2001. He served in the Army National Guard from 
2001 to 2003, and left with an honorable discharge at a rank of E-4. From 2007 to the 
present, Applicant has worked for a public school system. In 2012 he earned a 
bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university. In 2015 he applied for a linguist position with a 
defense contractor. (Tr. 19-21, 52; GE 2, 3.)   
 
In February 2003 Applicant traveled to Kenya. He remained there until December 
2003 during which time he married his wife, a Kenyan citizen and resident. He stayed 
with his mother, a Kenyan citizen and resident during this visit. (GE 3.) His wife 
subsequently became a naturalized U.S. citizen and resident. They have six children, 
one of whom was born in Kenya. All of the children are U.S. citizens and residents. (Tr. 
17-18, 26.) Applicant does not own any property in Kenya. He recently purchased his 
first home in the United States. (Tr. 39.) He has a retirement account in the United 
States. (Tr. 51.) 
 
Applicant’s father is deceased. His elderly mother is a citizen and resident of 
Kenya. Applicant has sent her about $5,000 over the past several years. He gives her 
$300 or $400 a year and speaks to her every weekend. She has visited him twice in the 
United States. (Tr. 27-31.) Applicant has two brothers, two sisters, two sisters-in-law, 
and one-brother-in-law, all of whom are citizens and residents of Kenya. One brother is 
a member of the Kenyan parliament. He was formerly an ambassador to a Middle East 
country. Applicant speaks to this brother once a week and visits him when he is in 
Kenya. (Tr. 42-44.) Applicant’s other brother was an employee of a Kenyan 
governmental agency; he is a business owner now. Applicant speaks to him once a 
week and visits him when he is in Kenya. (Tr. 47.) Applicant’s sisters are homemakers 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and their husbands work in private industry. He talks to his sisters less frequently, but at 
least annually. He speaks to two sisters-in-law and one brother-in-law annually. They 
are citizens and residents of Kenya. (Tr. 42; 45-47; GE 3; Answer.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is deceased. His father-in-law is a U.S. citizen, residing 
in Kenya. Applicant’s wife has six half-siblings, who are citizen residents of Kenya. (Tr. 
27-28.) Applicant does not spend much time with these in-laws while visiting Kenya. (Tr. 
38.) He does have annual contact with them. (GE 3.) 
 
Applicant has a current Kenyan passport, which was issued in May 2012 and will 
expire in May 2022. He has held a Kenyan passport since 1994, including after 
becoming a U.S. citizen in 2002. (GE 3.) He uses the Kenyan passport to travel to and 
from Kenya because it allows him to travel without obtaining a visa, paying fees, or 
completing documents. (Tr. 40-42.) He used that passport for visits to Kenya in 2003, 
2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016. He intends to return to Kenya in 
the summer of 2017. He stays with his mother when he visits Kenya. Sometimes, he 
volunteers to work with Kenyan youth while there. (Tr. 33-38.) He also used his Kenyan 
passport to travel to Tanzania in 2013, and Rwanda and Somalia in 2014 because of its 
convenience in entering and exiting those countries without a visa or paying fees. He 
uses his current U.S. passport for travel to other countries. (Tr. 41; GE 1.) He said that 
he would not use the Kenyan passport if it interfered with obtaining employment with the 
U.S. Government. (Tr. 45.) 
 
In summarizing his case, Applicant said that he served the United States 
honorably while in the armed forces. He believes he would be an asset for the U.S. 
Government in its work in the Middle East because of his Kenyan background, military 
training, and linguistic skills. He asserted his love for this country. (Tr. 54-55.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
Applicant was born in Kenya. He came to the United States in 1995 and became 
a U.S. citizen in 2002. Based on his Kenyan citizenship, he has maintained a Kenyan 
passport since becoming a U.S. citizen. He renewed his current passport in 2012 and it 
expires in 2022. He has used the Kenyan passport at least nine times since 2003 to 
travel to and from Kenya and other countries, in order to avoid paying fees and having 
to obtain additional travel documents. The evidence raises the above disqualifying 
conditions and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concern.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
  Applicant’s Kenyan passport has not been destroyed, surrendered to his security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG 
¶ 11(e).  
 
 Foreign Influence1 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
                                            
1Department Counsel chose not to seek administrative notice or offer other evidence concerning whether 
Kenya was known to target United States’ citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism; thus, no finding of heightened risk based on those factors is appropriate. 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s ongoing relationship with his mother, two brothers, and two sisters, 
who are citizens and residents of Kenya, create a potential conflict of interest for him. 
As a member of the Kenyan parliament, one of his brothers has a close connection to 
the Kenyan government. Another brother also had a close connection to the Kenyan 
government. These relationships are sufficiently close in nature to raise a security 
concern about his obligation or desire to assist those family members by providing 
sensitive or classified information, if faced with coercion from an outside source. In 
addition, he has two sisters-in-law, and one brother-in-law who are citizens and 
residents of Kenya. His father-in-law is a U.S. citizen, residing in Kenya. There is 
sufficient evidence to establish the above disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(b) based 
on these many relatives residing in Kenya. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
The three with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not provide mitigation under the facts in this case. Applicant’s 
mother and siblings are citizens and residents of Kenya. One brother is a member of the 
Kenyan parliament and a former ambassador. His other brother is a former employee of 
a Kenyan government agency. That evidence raises the possibility that should adverse 
forces learn of Applicant’s work for the U.S. Government, the well-being of Applicant’s 
family members could be threatened to the point that Applicant would confront a choice 
between his family’s interests and those of the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1995 and became a citizen in 2002. His 
wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His six children are U.S. citizens. He has some 
economic ties to the United States, including a financial interest in a recently purchased 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
piece of real estate and money in a 401(k). He attended a U.S. university. He has 
worked for a public school system for ten years. He honorably served in the U.S. 
military for about seven years. In sum, Applicant’s has some strong connections to the 
United States. However, those connections to the United States do not sufficiently 
outweigh his ties or affection for his family in Kenya, which are demonstrated by his 
financial support for his mother and frequent visits there to see family members. The 
evidence does not clearly establish that if Applicant were placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States, that he would choose the United 
States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. Since leaving Kenya in 1995, Applicant has maintained 
ongoing frequent contact with his mother and brothers, who are citizens and residents 
of Kenya. He also has regular but less frequent contact with his sisters and in-laws. 
Since 2003 he has visited his family at least nine times, and intends to return to Kenya 
in 2017. His mother has visited him in the United States. These contacts are neither 
casual nor infrequent.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence weighs in 
favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is an intelligent and articulate 
person, who has lived in the United States since 1995 and served in Navy and National 
Guard. He has worked for a public school system for the past ten years. He obtained a 
degree from a U. S. university. He has financial interests in the United States. He lives 
with his wife and six children, all of whom are U.S. citizens. Out of his sense of 
patriotism for the United States, Applicant would like to assist the U.S. Government’s 
endeavors as a linguist in the Middle East. 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis. First, 
Applicant has at least nine family members who are citizens and residents of Kenya. 
They include his mother, two brothers, and two sisters, two sisters-in-law, one brother-
in-law, and a father-in-law. One brother is a member of the Kenyan parliament and 
another brother is a former employee of a Kenyan governmental agency. Applicant has 
ongoing connections to those family members. Foreign entities could attempt to use 
Applicant’s family members to obtain protected information and compromise Applicant’s 
responsibilities to the United States.  
 
Second, Applicant had numerous connections to Kenya before he immigrated to 
the United States in 1995. He spent his formative years in Kenya and attended high 
school there. Third, he visits Kenya frequently and stays for long periods. Fourth, 
Applicant has maintained an active Kenyan passport since becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
uses that passport when he travels there and to surrounding countries because it 
provides logistical and financial conveniences for him. Fifth, while his loyalty and 
connections to family members in Kenya are positive familial traits, as is his volunteer 
work with Kenyan youth, for security clearance purposes these connections are more 
significant and persuasive than the factors in favor of granting him a security clearance.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline C and Guideline B. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
        Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
