                                                              
           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS   
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01030 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
February 15, 2017                      
            
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 9, 2015. On June 25, 2016, after reviewing the application and information 
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility issued a statement of reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) concerning Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 28, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 7, 2016. The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2016. The hearing 
was held as scheduled on January 26, 2017. The Government offered Government 
Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. The Government also 
requested that I take administrative notice of various facts concerning Taiwan. (Tr. 16-
17.) Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits A through W, 
which were also admitted without objection. 
 
At the close of the evidence and closing arguments, I proposed to the parties that 
this case was appropriate for a summary disposition in Applicant’s favor.1 Applicant did 
not object. Department Counsel had 10 days to consider the matter and provided 
written notice on January 31, 2017, that Department Counsel did not object. (Tr. 47-50; 
Judge Exhibit I.)  
 
Applicant has a mother, two brothers, and a sister who are citizens and residents 
of Taiwan. Applicant entered the United States in 1994, and became an American 
citizen in 2001. She has been married to a native-born American citizen since 1993, and 
has two native-born American children. Applicant has considerable financial assets in 
the United States and none in Taiwan. Her ties to the United States far outweigh her 
ties to Taiwan. Based on the record evidence as a whole, I conclude that Department 
Counsel presented sufficient evidence to establish the facts alleged in the SOR under 
Guideline B. I also conclude that Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts admitted by Applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. In particular, I conclude that the security concerns are resolved under the 
following mitigating conditions: AG ¶¶ 8 (a), 8(b), and 8(c).  
 
The concerns over Applicant’s relatives in Taiwan do not create doubt about her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I 
conclude that she met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. This case is decided for Applicant.  
 
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
1 Summary Disposition is appropriate in cases where the undisputed evidence justifies a favorable 
decision of the case, with no potential appellate issues. This decision is issued in accordance with 
instructions from the Director, DOHA, contained in an email dated November 12, 2016. 
