 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00087 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The Government amended the SOR on August 11, 2016. 
Applicant answered the amended SOR on September 6, 2016. The case was assigned 
to me on October 5, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
 
2 
 
 
a notice of hearing on December 19, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
January 25, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection.  Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A through G, which were admitted into evidence without objection. After the hearing she 
provided AE H, which was admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the amended allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.2 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. She graduated from high school in 2008 and earned 
some college credits. She married in 2013 and has a one-year-old child. She has been 
employed by a government contractor since December 2014.3  
 
 Applicant admitted she did not timely file her 2012, 2013, and 2014 federal 
income tax returns.4 In 2010, Applicant was living with her parents. Her parents had 
Applicant’s 2011 federal income tax return prepared by the same tax professional they 
used. In 2012, Applicant was no longer living with her parents. The tax professional 
prepared Applicant’s tax return, but refused to file the return until Applicant paid her. 
Applicant did not have the money to pay the tax professional. She was earning between 
$8 and $9 an hour at the time. She credibly testified that she was unaware that she 
could prepare and file her own tax returns. She believed a professional tax preparer 
was required. This is why she did not timely file her income tax returns for 2012 through 
2014.5  
 
 Subsequently, Applicant began earning more money. She contacted another tax 
professional and filed her 2012, 2013, and 2014 Federal income tax returns at the same 
time in April 2015. She retrieved transcripts from the IRS and noted that the transcripts 
did not report that her 2012 and 2013 returns were filed. She contacted her tax 
professional and was advised that because Applicant’s husband previously had his 
identity stolen, and they were filing jointly, the tax professional had to use a special 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the Government’s exhibit list. HE II is its discovery letter. 
 
2 The original SOR alleged tax years 2012 through 2014. The amended SOR alleged 2012 and 2013.  
 
3 Tr. 19-21. 
 
4 I have not considered Applicant’s admission that she did not timely file her 2014 Federal income tax 
return for disqualifying purposes, but will consider it when analyzing her credibility, in mitigation and the 
whole person. 
 
5 Tr. 24-31. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
code. The tax professional incorrectly put the wrong code on the tax returns and the IRS 
rejected the returns. The tax professional provided a letter confirming that Applicant filed 
her 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns in April 2015, and that he failed to inform 
Applicant that the returns were rejected by the IRS. The tax professional failed to timely 
resubmit the returns with the correct information. Applicant was unaware of the problem 
until she requested copies of her tax transcripts. Upon learning of the problem, she 
made an appointment at the IRS and submitted the completed returns in person. She 
provided copies of the date stamped returns for 2012 and 2013. Applicant does not 
intend on using the same tax professional in the future.6 
 
 Applicant testified that she owes taxes for 2015. When she contacted the IRS 
about retrieving her 2012 and 2013 transcripts, they advised her she could arrange an 
installment agreement. She was previously unaware of this option. She stated she 
called the IRS to negotiate an installment agreement, but waited on hold on the 
telephone for hours for a representative until she had to go retrieve her daughter from 
daycare. She subsequently made a payment toward the balance owed for her 2015 
taxes. After the hearing, she contacted the IRS again to arrange an installment 
agreement for her 2015 taxes and was advised the process takes four to six weeks. 
Because she is due refunds from tax years 2012 and 2013, the IRS representative 
advised her to wait until those refunds are applied to her 2015 taxes and then she can 
arrange an installment agreement. The IRS agreed to waive the penalties that were 
originally accessed. She was granted an extension so collection notices would not be 
triggered.7  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that she understands the seriousness of her conduct 
and apologized for her actions. She is committed to ensuring her tax returns are timely 
filed in the future.8  
 
 Applicant provided character letters that describe her as trustworthy, responsible, 
reliable, efficient, valuable, organized, competent, intelligent, dedicated, mature, honest, 
loyal, and dependable. She has an outstanding work ethic and is a person with integrity. 
She is a dedicated church member and actively participates in many of the various 
ministries of her church.9 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
6 Tr. 31-40; AE B, C, D, F. 
 
7 Tr. 41-51; AE G, H. 
 
8 Tr. 51-52. 
 
9 AE E. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following is 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (f) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file her 2012 and 2013 ederal income tax returns, as 
required. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant did not timely file her 2012 and 2013 Federal income tax returns 
because she did not have the money to pay a tax professional. In the past, her parents 
arranged to have her tax returns timely filed. She was unaware that she did not need a 
tax professional to file her returns. Her testimony was credible. She hired a tax 
professional to file her 2012, 2013, and 2014 Federal income tax returns. The tax 
professional failed to do so correctly and failed to notify Applicant when the returns were 
rejected. When Applicant learned of the problem, she contacted the IRS and filed the 
delinquent returns. She is committed to ensuring future tax returns are timely filed. It is 
unlikely she will have this problem again and her behavior does not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct was somewhat beyond her control, because she did not 
have sufficient money to pay a tax professional to prepare and file the returns. Due to 
her youth and naiveté, she was unaware that she was not required to use a tax 
professional. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. She acted responsibly when she contacted a tax 
professional to file her delinquent returns. Later she learned that he failed to notify her 
when the returns were rejected because of his mistake. She subsequently had her 
returns prepared and hand carried the returns to the IRS. Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. She now understands her responsibilities 
regarding timely filing her tax returns. AG ¶ 20(c) applies, as the matters are under 
control. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 26 years old. She clearly was confused about the available options 
for timely filing her Federal income tax returns. She has rectified the problem and 
understands her obligations. Her youth and misunderstanding were evident. I am 
convinced her actions were not due to an unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, but rather she was unaware of available alternatives for filing the returns 
when she did not have the financial resources to pay a tax professional. I do not have 
questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
