1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-01743 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lynette M. Petruska, Esq. 
___________ 
Decision 
___________ 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
In February 2015, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated by alcohol 
(DWI). She pleaded guilty to DWI. She completed an alcohol counseling class and all 
court-ordered requirements. She reduced her alcohol consumption, and she does not 
drive after consuming alcohol. Her DWI is unlikely to recur, and her DWI does not cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is 
granted.      
History of the Case 
On June 4, 2015, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On August 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
 
2 
                                         
 
a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and J (criminal conduct). 
 
 On September 7, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On October 12, 
2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On November 10, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. On November 17, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for December 6, 2016. (HE 1) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
four exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
(Transcript (Tr.) 11-14; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D) On December 14, 2016, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. One additional exhibit was 
admitted after the hearing without objection. (Tr. 65, 82; AE E)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted the SOR allegations. She also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old engineer scientist, who has been employed by a major 
defense contractor for 31 years. (Tr. 15-16, 61; GE 1) She works on a crucial DOD 
weapons system. One of her other responsibilities is to mentor and train less experienced 
engineers. (Tr. 21) She has received excellent performance evaluations from her 
employer. (Tr. 22-31; AE A-AE C) Her evaluations lauded her diligence, honesty, integrity, 
contributions to mission accomplishment, and good judgment. Applicant believes she is 
contributing to the national defense, and she loves her work. (Tr. 66) She has held a 
security clearance for 31 years, and there is no evidence of security violations. (Tr. 15)  
 
In 1999, Applicant married, and in 2012, she divorced. (Tr. 61) In 2013, she married 
her current spouse. (Tr. 61) She does not have any children. (Tr. 61) She has never 
served in the U.S. Armed Forces. (Tr. 62) In 1985, she received a bachelor of science 
degree in electrical engineering. (Tr. 62) She completed three semesters towards her 
master’s degree. (Tr. 62) 
 
Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct 
 
In February 2015, Applicant attended a post-funeral gathering of friends of the 
deceased, and she consumed an excessive amount of wine. (Tr. 31, 34) She was sad 
because of the loss of her close friend of 30 years, and she uncharacteristically consumed 
more wine than was customary over a 90-minute period. (Tr. 35-37, 47, 64) She drove 
away from the bar; she hit another car that was stopped at a light; and she was arrested 
for DWI. (Tr. 48-49) She was going about five miles per hour when she struck the back 
of the other vehicle. (Tr. 57) There were no injuries. Restitution was paid to the other 
 
3 
                                         
 
driver for the damage to his vehicle. (Tr. 58) Her blood alcohol content (BAC) was .18 
and the DWI level in her state was a BAC of .08. (Tr. 47-49, 63)  
 
In July 2015, Applicant pleaded guilty to DWI, and the court ordered her to 
complete a 10-hour alcohol-counseling program, to be on probation for two years until 
July 2017, and to pay a $665 fine. (Tr. 55, 73; GE 2) Her probation was unsupervised, 
and the only requirement was for her not to violate any criminal laws. (Tr. 56) On January 
12, 2017, the court granted Applicant’s motion for early termination of her probation. (AE 
E) She successfully completed the alcohol-counseling program, and she paid the fine. 
(Tr. 32, 37-39, 64; AE D) She was remorseful about the DWI. (Tr. 36) After February 
2015, she did not drive after drinking any alcohol, and she committed to not driving after 
drinking alcohol in the future. (Tr. 37, 45, 53)  
 
Except for her February 2015 DWI, Applicant has never been stopped for suspicion 
of DWI or arrested for DWI. (Tr. 32, 46) She continues to consume alcohol. (Tr. 53) Before 
February 2015, Applicant usually asked a friend to drive her home if she drank an 
excessive amount of alcohol. (Tr. 33) Typically, she consumes one or two glasses of wine 
three or four times a week. (Tr. 39, 69) She may drink until she can feel the effect of the 
alcohol, which involves consumption of three glasses of wine; however, she does not 
drink alcohol to intoxication. (Tr. 40, 53-54) She has never been diagnosed with alcohol 
abuse, alcohol dependence, or alcohol use disorder. (Tr. 65)  
 
Applicant’s husband has been diagnosed with stage four cancer. (Tr. 70) Applicant 
has been taking excellent care of him. (Tr. 70) Her husband believes Applicant is reliable, 
trustworthy, and responsible, and her judgment is impeccable. (Tr. 70-71)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  Two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
 
5 
                                         
 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment,1 regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
In February 2015, Applicant consumed an excessive amount of wine, and then 
drove her vehicle, striking another vehicle stopped at a traffic light. She was arrested for 
DWI. Her BAC result was .18, which is more than double the level under state law for a 
DWI. A BAC of .18 is sufficient to establish binge alcohol consumption to the point of 
impaired judgment. In July 2015, Applicant pleaded guilty and was found guilty of a 
misdemeanor-level DWI. She was not diagnosed with alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence under the Diagnostic and Statistical Manuals of Mental Disorders (DSM) IV-
TR, or alcohol use disorder under DSM-V.2 AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are established.  
 
Four conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable and may mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
                                            
1The term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines.
 
“Binge drinking is the most 
common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United States. See the Center for Disease Control website, 
(stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines binge drinking as a pattern of 
drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This 
typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and when women consume 4 or more drinks, in 
about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-drinking.htm.  
 
2The criteria for “alcohol abuse” and “alcohol dependence” are drawn from the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manuals of Mental Disorders (DSM) DSM-IV-TR, which was in effect when the Adjudicative 
Guidelines were issued in 2006. In May 2013, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) issued the 5th 
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM–5).The criteria in DSM-IV-TR for 
alcohol dependence and in DSM-5 for alcohol use disorder (AUD) are objective, well established, and rely 
primarily on self-reports and descriptions. DSM–5 integrates the two DSM–IV disorders, alcohol abuse and 
alcohol dependence, into a single disorder called alcohol use disorder (AUD) with mild, moderate, and 
severe sub-classifications. DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 are used throughout the medical and legal communities 
to determine alcohol dependence and AUD severe, which have the same criteria. AUD-moderate overlaps 
with both alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. The alcohol consumption guideline does not incorporate 
DSM remission criteria and leaves mitigation to a case-by-case determination. 
 
6 
                                         
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and 
is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b) and 22(c) do not apply because alcohol abuse or dependence is not 
established, and Applicant is not currently participating in an alcohol treatment or 
counseling program. AG ¶ 23(a) applies, and AG ¶ 23(d) partially applies. In February 
2015, Applicant consumed an excessive amount of alcohol, drove her vehicle, and was 
involved in an accident. She was arrested, charged, and convicted of DWI. Her DWI is 
relatively recent; however, her DWI is “infrequent” because it is the only alcohol-related 
offense she has committed. She promised not to drive after consuming alcohol. Her DWI 
therefore “happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur,” and 
her DWI does not cast doubt on her “current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” She successfully completed an alcohol-counseling program. She reduced her 
alcohol consumption after February 2015, and she demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified alcohol consumption. Because she did not provide a favorable 
prognosis, AG ¶ 23(d) cannot be fully applied. Alcohol consumption security concerns are 
mitigated.  
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses . . . ;” and “(c) 
allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” In February 2015, Applicant was 
arrested for DWI. In July 2015, she was convicted of DWI. Although her DWI conviction 
is a misdemeanor,3 it is a serious offense. When Applicant drove while intoxicated, she 
risked serious injury to herself and others. She completed all sentence requirements. On 
January 12, 2017, she completed her probation. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) are established. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 32(c) do not apply because Applicant was not pressured into 
committing the DWI, and she admitted that she committed the offense. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
32(d) apply for the same reasons as discussed in AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(d) under the alcohol 
consumption guideline, supra. Applicant’s misdemeanor-level DWI in February 2015, was 
two years ago and is still relatively recent. Such criminal activity is infrequent, has not 
recurred, and is unlikely to occur in the future. Applicant made a sincere and credible 
commitment not to drive after consuming alcohol. Aside from her DWI, she has an 
excellent employment record. Criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
  
                                            
3See Missouri Revised Statute Section 577.001 (stating first driving while intoxicated offense 
without special circumstances is a misdemeanor). Applicant contended that her DWI was a municipal 
ordnance violation. (AE E) Applicant did not provide a citation indicating a DWI in Missouri was not a criminal 
offense. 
 
8 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old engineer scientist, who has been employed by a major 
defense contractor for 31 years. She has received excellent performance evaluations 
from her employer. Her evaluations laud her diligence, honesty, integrity, contributions to 
mission accomplishment, and good judgment. She has held a security clearance for 31 
years, and there is no evidence of security violations. In 1985, she received a bachelor of 
science degree in electrical engineering, and she completed three semesters towards her 
master’s degree. Her husband believes Applicant is reliable, trustworthy, and responsible, 
and her judgment is impeccable.   
 
Applicant’s single misdemeanor-level DWI in February 2015 is serious and reflects 
poorly on her judgment. It is her first and only DWI. After her DWI, she completed an 
alcohol counseling course and all court-ordered requirements. She successfully 
completed her probation. She was not diagnosed with alcohol abuse or dependence 
under DSM-IV-TR, or alcohol use disorder under DSM-V. She assured she does not drive 
after drinking alcohol. Her DWI “happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur,” and her DWI does not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Alcohol 
consumption and criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
