 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00047 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tova Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 19, 2016. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2 - 4 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 
26, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional evidence, nor 
object to the Government’s evidence. Items 2 - 4 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on January 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations with 
explanations. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of 
the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. He is married for the second time and has one adult 
child. He has worked for a defense contractor since June 2015. He served in the Navy 
from 1970-1973. He holds a bachelor’s degree.1  
  
 The SOR lists eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $13,920. The debts 
include a delinquent mortgage account, and seven charged-off or collection consumer 
accounts. The debts are supported by a credit report from July 2015, Applicant’s 
statement to a defense investigator in October 2015, and by Applicant’s SOR 
admissions.2 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began in approximately 2009 when he was 
diagnosed with cancer. He was then laid off from his employment because of his 
medical condition. He was unable to work full-time when he was receiving his cancer 
treatments. He did not receive pay during this period. Applicant owns three income-
producing rental properties. In early 2014, he returned to a job on a full time basis. 
However, he was terminated in July 2014 from that position and was unemployed until 
he was hired for his current position in June 2015. In January 2015, one of Applicant’s 
rental property was damaged by fire and required extensive repairs. He claims he paid 
$12,000 in repairs and upgrades to bring the property back to habitability. He did not 
provide documentation to support these claims. He attempted to refinance the mortgage 
on the previously damaged property, but the mortgage holder was unwilling to do so.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 1, 3-4. 
 
3 Items 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (consumer charged-off account $4,992): 
 
 Applicant admitted this was an account he opened, but he claimed he cancelled 
his membership. No documentation was provided. The date of last activity was 
September 2008. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (delinquent mortgage $7,528): 
 
 Applicant’s July 2015 credit report shows a balance owed of $181,511 on this 
mortgage and a past-due amount of $7,528. The date of last activity was February 
2015. Applicant failed to provide documentation showing contact with the creditor, 
refinancing plans, or payment. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.h (collection accounts for $529, $445, $244, $77, $54, $51): 
 
 Applicant claims he is working with a collection agency to resolve these collection 
accounts. He did not provide documentation showing contact with the collection service 
or any attempt to pay or settle these debts. These debts are unresolved.6 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. He did not provide information about the rental income he receives from his 
three properties. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
4 Items 3-4. 
 
5 Item 1, 3-4. 
 
6 Items 1, 3-4. 
 
7 Items 1-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented some evidence that he experienced medical difficulties and 
unemployment. These were due to circumstances beyond his control, however, he has 
not shown that he took responsible action to address the debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. He failed to provide documentation showing efforts to contact the 
creditors, set up payment plans, or payments on the debts. There is no evidence of 
financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) and. AG ¶ 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his military service. 
Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
