 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02401 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Guideline C foreign preference security concerns, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines B, foreign influence, and C, foreign preference. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 23, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 19, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 24, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3.1 Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 1, 2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted HEs II and III, which are written requests that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq and Egypt, respectively. Applicant 
did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the 
requests that are supported by source documents from official U.S. Government 
publications.2 The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, except ¶ 2.b, which he failed to 
provide a response. I will consider the nonresponse as a denial. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
  
 Applicant is 56 years old. He was born in Iraq and earned bachelor degrees there 
in 1983 and 1986. He married an Iraqi citizen in 1989 and they divorced in 2006. He has 
two children from the marriage, a son born in 1990 and a daughter born in 1994. Both 
children are students residing in Egypt. He remarried an American citizen in 2007. She 
was working in Iraq, and they married in Sri Lanka. She returned to the United States 
and applied for a visa for him to join her. He came to the United States in March 2010 
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2013.3 
 
Applicant was an officer in the Iraqi military from 1983 until he retired in the rank 
of major in 1994. He collected a retirement pension from the Iraqi government. He 
stated it was about $200 a month. In 2003, he joined the new Iraqi military and his 
previous pension was terminated. He is still entitled to a pension, but must return to Iraq 
and apply for it. He does not receive any other benefits from the Iraqi government. He 
testified that from 2003 to 2010, he worked and lived with the U.S. forces and received 
certificates of appreciation as a military officer from 2003, 2005, 2009, and 2010. He 
retired from the Iraqi military in 2010.4  
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the Government’s discovery letter.  
 
2 Attached to the requests are the source documents.  
 
3 Tr. 23-33. 
 
4 Tr. 40, 42-49; AE A. He also provided certificates of completion for courses, along with photographs of 
him with various American military members. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified he left Iraq in 2010. He returned in April 2014, as an employee 
for a U.S. government contractor. Their work was suspended in June 2014, due to 
security issues and concern for their safety. Applicant and the other employees 
transited and stayed in the United Arab Emirates until their work was officially 
suspended. Applicant testified he returned to the United States in October 2014. 
However, his counterintelligence investigative report shows that instead of returning to 
the United States, Applicant traveled to Egypt and resided with his children there from 
July to December 2014, when he returned to the United States.5 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. He last saw her in 2010 and 
spoke with her once by telephone in February 2016. Before then he spoke with her 
monthly. He has limited contact with her because he is concerned that “they” may find 
out that he is communicating with his mother, intercept cell phone calls, and cause her 
trouble. Because “they” know that he works with the U.S. government, and he has to 
consider everything so he can avoid problems for his mother. He stated he has to 
account for everything to avoid problems. When asked who “they” were, he explained 
there are a lot of militia in Iraq and ISIS is a major terrorist organization. The militia may 
know he works with U.S. troops. He does not know for certain, but he explained he 
cannot trust anyone, so he is concerned if these groups become aware he works for the 
U.S. military. He does not send his mother money, as she is self-sufficient and has 
considerable resources. She owns two homes. He stated that when his mother passes 
away he will share the inheritance with his brother.6 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. He is employed by the 
Ministry of Education, as a teacher. His brother, his brother’s wife, and their two children 
live together with their mother. Applicant last saw his brother when he visited his mother 
in 2010, and last spoke with him by telephone in February 2016. He has limited his 
contact with his brother for the same reasons as with his mother, due to safety 
concerns.7  
 
 Applicant’s children live together in Egypt and are students. They moved there in 
2006, and live with their mother and her father. Their mother and grandfather travel 
back and forth between Egypt and Iraq, but the children remain in Egypt. Both children 
are citizens of Iraq. Applicant visits them annually and last visited them in October 2016. 
He speaks telephonically with his son daily and his daughter every three to four days. 
He provides financial support to his children from $500 to $700 monthly or more if 
needed. Applicant stated that his son is responsible for his sister. His son has 
completed college and is attending language school. Applicant testified that his son has 
been approved to move to the United States and is waiting for a special immigration 
visa that is granted for relatives of those who served with U.S. forces in Iraq. Applicant 
did not have the document verifying his son has been approved. His son will immigrate 
                                                          
5 Tr. 33-34, 49-50. 
  
6 Tr. 36, 50-55. 
 
7 Tr. 36-37, 55; AE B 
 
4 
 
 
as soon as he is approved. Applicant intends to request his daughter also receive the 
special immigration visa. She has two years remaining to complete her education and 
will remain in Egypt until then. After his son moves, his daughter will likely move into the 
same apartment as her mother and grandfather, who live in the same building. 
Applicant has no assets in Egypt. His children have not visited him in the United 
States.8 
 
 Applicant owns land in Iraq. He did not disclose this information on his SCA or 
during his background interview. He stated the land was gifted to him in 1983 from the 
Iraqi government when he graduated from college. He estimated its value at between 
$60,000 and $100,000, depending on the market. He is not required to pay tax on the 
land. He stated that when the situation in Iraq improves, he intends to sell the land and 
use the proceeds to purchase a home in the United States.9  
 
 Applicant and his wife currently reside in different states and visit each other 
every two months. They own a home jointly that she lives in. They purchased it in 2011 
for approximately $120,000 and have about $45,000 remaining on the mortgage. 
Applicant has savings and checking accounts in the United States, with about $17,000 
in them. Applicant owns a late model car. He is registered to vote and did so in the last 
election.10  
 
Iraq11 
 
 The United States Department of State warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at 
high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. It is recommended that they avoid all but 
essential travel to Iraq. The potential threat to U.S. Government personnel in Iraq is 
serious and requires them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
 The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of 
Iraq’s territory. Within areas of ISIL control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability to 
control and ensure public safety. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias may threaten U.S. cities 
and western companies throughout Iraq. Violence and attacks by improvised explosive 
devices (IED) occur frequently in many areas of the country. There are numerous 
methods of attack including human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines, mortars, and 
rockets. Such attacks take place in public venues.  
                                                          
8 Tr. 27-29, 37-40, 42, 55-62, 66-67. Applicant did not disclose that he had a daughter on his security 
clearance application (SCA; GE 1). He also did not disclose that information in his Counterintelligence-
Focused Investigation (GE 2) or during his background interview with a government investigator (GE 3). 
Applicant’s failure to disclose said information and his contact with his daughter was not alleged. It will not 
be considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when analyzing his credibility, the whole 
person, and in mitigation.  
 
9 Tr. 62-69. 
 
10 Tr. 65, 68-79. 
 
11 HE II. 
 
5 
 
 
 Iraq continues to witness a surge in terrorist attacks, primarily as a result of ISIL. 
It continues to be the greatest terrorist threat globally, maintaining formidable forces in 
Iraq, including a large number of foreign terrorist fighters. Despite Iraq’s efforts to 
combat ISIL, there remains a security vacuum in parts of the country.  
 
 Human rights violations were predominantly carried out by ISIL. These included 
attacks on civilians, especially members of other religious and ethnic minorities, women 
and children. The acts of violence committed by ISIL included killings by suicide 
bombers, IEDs, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and other forms of 
executions. Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of transparency at all 
levels of government and society weakened the Iraqi government’s authority and 
worsened human rights protections. 
 
Egypt12 
 
 Egypt has experienced increased terrorism and violent extremism since 2013. 
There are a number of terrorist organizations known to be operating in Egypt and 
attacks are prevalent throughout the country. Egypt acknowledges the threat of foreign 
terrorist fighters traveling to fight with ISIL in Syria and returning to Egypt. In 2014, the 
Egyptian government continued to confront active terrorist groups, which conducted 
deadly attacks on government and military targets throughout the country. One group, 
Ansar Bayt Al-Maqdis (ABM) has pledged its allegiance to ISIL increasing the risk that 
terrorist attacks could target U.S. and Western interests, including civilians, and the 
country’s tourist industry. Terrorist attacks continued throughout the country. Political 
protests occur, often without warning. Some demonstrations have led to violent clashes 
between protesters and the police, resulting in deaths, injuries, and property damage.  
 
 Egypt has significant human rights problems that include excessive use of force 
by security forces, including unlawful killings and torture; the suppression of civil 
liberties that include government restrictions on freedoms of expression and the press, 
and, freedom of peaceful assembly and association; and limitation of due process in 
court proceedings. Domestic and international human rights organizations reported 
security forces killed demonstrators and police tortured suspects at police stations, 
sometimes resulting in death.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
12 HE III. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
7 
 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”13 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens and residents of Iraq. His children are 
citizens of Iraq, residing in Egypt. He has regular contact with the children. Before 
February 2016, he had regular contact with his mother and brother, but consciously 
ceased it due to concerns about their safety, in the event that it became known to militia 
and terrorist groups that he has connections with the United States or entities 
associated with the United States. Applicant also owns real estate in Iraq that is worth 
between $60,000 and $100,000.  
 
Terrorist activity, the infiltration of ISIL, sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, 
and lack of transparency at all levels of the Iraqi government, in addition to its failure to 
protect human rights, is a concern. Egypt also has problems with terrorist activities and 
significant human rights issues. Applicant’s close relationship with his relatives living in 
Iraq and his concern for their safety creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of 
interest. Applicant’s close ties with his children living in Egypt could create a potential 
foreign influence concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. I 
have considered the value of Applicant’s property in Iraq compared with his assets in 
the United States. I find that although he has financial interests in the United States, the 
value of his land in Iraq is substantial, which could subject Applicant to a heightened risk 
of foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 7(e) also applies.  
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
Applicant worked as an Iraqi Army officer with the U.S. Government and military 
forces from 2003 to 2010, when he retired. He married a U.S. citizen in 2007 and 
 
9 
 
 
immigrated to the United States in 2010. He became a naturalized citizen in 2013. 
Applicant maintained close ties with his family in Iraq until February 2016, when he 
became concerned for their safety if his connections to the United States were to 
become known. He indicated he could not trust anyone in Iraq, and therefore ceased 
contact with his family living there. Kidnappings and terrorist activity are prevalent in 
Iraq. I am unable to find that it is unlikely Applicant would be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of family members and the interests of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply to his family members in Iraq. Applicant’s 
children live in Egypt, a country that also has significant terrorist threats. With their 
unique status as Iraqi citizens residing in Egypt with their Iraqi mother and grandfather, 
who travel frequently back and forth between the two countries, I am unable to conclude 
that it is unlikely Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of his children and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply to his children. 
 
Applicant is close with his family members in Iraq and is concerned about 
protecting them. He had regular contact with them before he decided to cease contact 
for their safety. He expressed concern that if a militant group were to discover his ties to 
the U.S. government, his family would be in danger. Applicant loyally served U.S. forces 
in Iraq. However, his relationship with his family in Iraq and the potential for them to be 
exploited by terrorist groups, if they learn about his past service or future service with 
the U.S. government or its contractors, creates a conflict of interest. His familial ties are 
too significant and longstanding to expect him to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the interests of the United States instead of his family. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. The 
same analysis applies for Applicant’s children, who are Iraqi citizens living in Egypt, a 
country where terrorist activities are prevalent. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to Applicant’s 
family in Iraqi or Egypt because their contact and communication is more than casual 
and infrequent.  
 
Applicant has owned real estate in Iraq valued between $60,000 and $100,000, 
since 1983. Applicant has some assets in the United States. He and his wife jointly own 
a house they purchased for approximately $120,000, with a remaining mortgage of 
about $45,000. He has cash accounts worth about $17,000. The property in Iraq is a 
significant holding in Applicant’s financial portfolio, and he intends to use the 
prospective profits from sale of the property to purchase a home in the United States. I 
cannot find that the value of this property is so nominal that it is unlikely to result in a 
conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure 
Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern involving foreign preference: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
 
10 
 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following is potentially applicable. 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: . . . (2) military service or a 
willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; (3) accepting educational, 
medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign 
government. 
 
Applicant served in the Iraqi military from 1983 to 1994, when he retired and 
received a pension. In 2003, he ceased receiving the military pension when he joined 
the new Iraqi military and served until 2010. I find the above disqualifying condition 
applies. 
 
AG ¶11 describes conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and the following is potentially applicable:  
 
(c) exercise of the rights privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor. 
 
Applicant’s service in the Iraqi military occurred before he became a U.S. citizen. 
He ceased receiving a pension when he rejoined the Iraqi military. He served with U.S. 
forces and retired in 2010, when he came to the United States and became a citizen in 
2013. Although he is entitled to receive a military pension from the Iraqi government, he 
has not applied for it. He has not received any benefits from the Iraqi government since 
becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 11(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He served in the Iraqi military and in support of U.S. 
forces in Iraq from 2003 to 2010. He married a U.S. citizen in 2007 and moved to the 
United States in 2010. He became a U.S. citizen in 2013. He and his wife own a home 
in the United States. He also has strong familial ties to Iraq where her mother and 
brother are citizens and residents. He expressed concern for their safety, if it were 
known by terrorists that Applicant works for the U.S. government. I have considered his 
service as an Iraqi officer serving with U.S. forces and the special consideration 
afforded to those willing to serve. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s 
proven record of action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to 
a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”14 Although I do not question 
Applicant’s service and loyalty to the United States, I find that his strong family ties 
create a significant burden should a conflict of interest arise or if he were placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interest of his family living in Iraq or his family 
living in Egypt, and the interests of the United States. I also have considered that 
Applicant has significant financial interests in Iraq. Applicant’s service in the Iraqi 
military occurred before he became a U.S. citizen. He is entitled to a military pension 
from the Iraqi government, but he does not receive it. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign preference 
guideline security concerns, but failed to mitigate the foreign influence guideline security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
12 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
