 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09389 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On January 21, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and she elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. She did not submit any 
documents. On April 30, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) and it was mailed the same day. Applicant received it on May 
 
2 
 
 
12, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not object to any of the documents 
submitted by the Government, and they are admitted. Applicant provided a response to 
the FORM, which was included in the record without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on June 26, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m. 
She denied the remaining allegations. I have incorporated her admissions into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. She has not served in the military. She married in 1974 
and divorced in 1978. She has a grown daughter. She remarried in 1996. She has 
worked for the same federal contractor since 1999.1 
  
 Applicant and her husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004 and their debts 
were discharged the same year. Approximately $41,000 of delinquent debt was 
discharged, the bulk of which was due to credit card charges and a lien placed by one 
of the credit card companies.2 Applicant attributed the bankruptcy to her husband being 
laid off from his job and earning less in his new job.  
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $25,853. In 2009 
Applicant’s husband was laid off again from his job, and they experienced financial 
difficulties when he began working at a lower-paying job. Applicant related that in 2011 
her mother was ill, and Applicant did not concentrate on her finances. Her mother 
passed away in 2012. Then her aunt was diagnosed with cancer and passed away in 
November 2013. Applicant indicated in her SOR answer that she is “just now in a 
position to resume clearing and paying these debts.” Credit reports from October 2014, 
February 2012, and April 2007 substantiate the alleged delinquent debts.3 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance since 2002. In March 2007, she 
completed a security clearance application (SCA) and disclosed her 2004 bankruptcy. 
In February 2012, she completed an updated SCA and disclosed she had delinquent 
debts. She stated it was due to her husband’s change in income and gas prices. She 
stated: “Currently in the process of working with creditors to bring them current.”4 In her 
personal subject interview in June 2012, Applicant acknowledged her delinquent debts 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 7. 
 
3 Items 4, 5, and 8. 
 
4 Item 2 and 6. 
 
3 
 
 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.m, 1.o, and 1.p and indicated she would contact 
the creditors and make arrangements to bring the debts current.5 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.l and 1.m were for the same debt. She did not provide documents to substantiate her 
position. She indicated she would pay half of the debt with her tax refund and work out a 
payment plan to immediately begin to clear the debt in full. In response to the FORM, 
she indicated she had paid 60% of the debt and hoped to have it completely paid in four 
months. She did not provide documented proof of her payments.  
 
 Applicant indicated in her answer to the SOR and response to the FORM that 
she “cleared the debts” in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.k; paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f and 
1.g; paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.p, which was removed from her credit report; and disputed 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j with the creditor, and it was removed from her credit report. 
Applicant did not provide supporting documents for these assertions. 
 
 Applicant indicated she has contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c and will have the 
debt “cleared” in approximately four months. She indicated she is contacting the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.h to dispute the debt. She indicated she is researching the validity of the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.n and 1.o.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence of financial counseling, a current budget, or 
other information regarding the current state of her finances.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant had $41,000 of consumer debt discharged in bankruptcy in 2004. She 
has 15 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling approximately $25,853 that are 
unresolved. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
After having her debts resolved through bankruptcy in 2004, Applicant again 
experienced financial problems and has numerous delinquent debts that are 
unresolved. Her delinquent debts are unpaid and therefore recent. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude her financial problems occurred under unique circumstances and 
are unlikely to recur. Her finances cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant indicated her financial problems began again in 2009 when her 
husband lost his job and their income was reduced. This was a condition beyond their 
control. She also explained that her mother and aunt were ill, and therefore, she did not 
focus on her finances. Although she may have been distracted, she was already on 
notice that maintaining her finances was a security concern. Her distraction was within 
her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be evidence that Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. She completed her SCA in February 2012 
and had a background interview in June 2012. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
 
6 
 
 
evidence of actions she took to resolve her delinquent debts after she was on notice of 
the security concern. AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. 
 
There is no evidence to conclude Applicant has received financial counseling. 
She indicated she has paid, “cleared,” or resolved certain delinquent debts, but there is 
no documented proof to support her position. She has not provided evidence as to her 
current finances. I cannot find there are clear indications that her financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Applicant disputes some debts, but did not provide the basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debts, documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
dispute, or evidence of actions she has taken to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. She has a history of financial problems, which include a 
bankruptcy in 2004 and recent delinquent debts that remain unresolved. She did not 
provide documentation to support payments she indicated she made on debts. 
Applicant does not have a consistent track record to show she is resolving her financial 
problems. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude she 
 
7 
 
 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
