 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05028 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines H 
(drug involvement) and E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines H and E. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD CAF could not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. On October 20, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have a 
decision based on the administrative record in lieu of a hearing. On February 28, 2015, 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 4. A complete copy of the FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on March 18, 2015, and he received it on April 1, 2015. He was given 30 days 
from its receipt to file objections or submit matters in refutation, mitigation, or 
extenuation. He did not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Background 
 
 Under Guideline H, the SOR alleged that Applicant failed a random drug test in 
June 2010 by testing positive for marijuana while holding a security clearance (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that he was arrested and charged 
with Theft in the Second Degree in March 2011, pled guilty to a lesser included offense 
of Theft in the Fourth Degree, and was sentenced to probation, ordered to pay 
restitution, and the judgment was deferred (SOR ¶ 2.a). The two Guideline H allegations 
were cross-alleged along with the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a in a separate Guideline E 
allegation (SOR ¶ 2.b). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant did not address the specific 
allegations, but admitted to each guideline with comments.1 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since June 2006. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1982. He has 
not served in the military. He is divorced and has been living with a cohabitant since 
2007. He has one adult child. He was granted a security clearance in 2006.2 
 
Drug Allegations 
 
In his security clearance application (SCA) date May 4, 2011, Applicant disclosed 
that he was arrested and fined for the offense of “drug paraphernalia” in September 
1997 and that he tested positive for marijuana in a urinalysis test in June 2010. In the 
Section on Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity in his SCA, he described these incidents 
by stating he used marijuana “1” time in September 1997 and he “inhaled marijuana 
during one isolated incident” in June 2010. In his SCA, he also responded “Yes” to the 
question that asked whether he ever used a controlled substance while possessing a 
security clearance.3 
 
In an interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator in 
August 2011, Applicant indicated that a police officer observed him and a friend passing 
a “one hit marijuana box” in September 1997. He was charged with possession of drug 
paraphernalia, pled guilty to that charge, and paid about $1,000 as a fine and court 
                                                          
1 Items 1 and 2. 
2 Item 3. 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
costs. He also indicated that he could not recall exactly when he started using 
marijuana, “but it was in college roughly late 70’s or early 80’s.” He also stated he used 
marijuana recreationally about once every six months, but stopped using it after being 
arrested on the drug paraphernalia charge in September 1979.4 
 
In the OPM interview, Applicant also indicated that he tested positive for 
marijuana in June 2010. He explained that shortly before the drug test an old friend from 
high school was visiting his town and called him to get together. The friend came to 
Applicant’s house, pulled out a marijuana joint, and asked him if he wanted some. 
Applicant smoked about half of the joint. Applicant again indicated that this incident was 
the first time he had used marijuana since September 1997.5   
 
Applicant has not been diagnosed as a drug abuser or as drug dependent. He 
has not received any drug treatment or counseling. He was placed on administrative 
leave after testing positive for marijuana. Since then, he has taken at least six random 
drug tests, all of which had negative results.6 
 
In responding to interrogatories in October 2013, Applicant stated that he first 
used marijuana in 1978 and last used it in June 2010. He further stated that he used it 
“less than 4 dozen times in 32 year period,” that he was not currently using it, and that 
he had no intention of using it in the future.7 
 
Theft Allegation 
 
 In the OPM interview, Applicant also discussed the theft and possession of stolen 
property charges brought against him in 2011. Applicant lived in State A. He indicated 
that he found an abandoned railroad site in State B and started taking railroad signs and 
other collectables and selling them on eBay. One prospective buyer made an 
arrangement to pick up a railroad sign at Applicant’s house. During that transaction, 
Applicant showed the buyer his collection of items in a backroom. When they returned 
to the living room, four police officers were present. Applicant learned the purported 
buyer was an undercover officer. Upon questioning, Applicant admitted stealing the 
signs. His house was searched and stolen property was recovered.8   
 
 In March 2011, Applicant was charged with Theft in the Second Degree in    
State A. The charge indicated that Applicant exercised control over stolen property of a 
value over $200 but under $500, knowing such property was stolen and without the 
intent to restore it to its proper owner. This charge was categorized as a serious 
                                                          
4 Item 4. 
5 Item 4. 
6 Item 4. 
7 Item 4. 
8 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
misdemeanor. In June 2011, he pled guilty to a lesser included offense of Theft in the 
Fourth Degree pursuant to a plea agreement in which the State would recommend a 
deferred judgment. As part of the deferred judgment, he was ordered to pay a civil 
penalty of $315, pay restitution to the railroad company of $2,945, and was placed on 
probation for one year. In August 2012, the court discharged Applicant from probation 
and expunged the deferred judgment from his record.9  
 
 Applicant was also charged with theft in State B. This charge was categorized as 
a Class A misdemeanor. In June 2011, Applicant pled guilty to that charge.  The court’s 
disposition of the charge consisted of a one-year “continuance under court supervision” 
with the condition that he not violate any criminal or traffic law in that or any other 
jurisdiction, an assessment of $500, and restitution (same as listed under the State A 
disposition).10    
 
Character Evidence 
 
 A director at Applicant’s company recommended that Applicant retain his security 
clearance. The director indicated that Applicant continued to demonstrate an excellent 
work ethic and attitude since the incidents reflected in the SOR.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
9 Item 4. 
10 Item 4. 
11 Item 2. 
 
5 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 sets forth the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
6 
 
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and find the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
In June 2010, Applicant tested positive for use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 26. The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana in June 2010 while holding a security clearance was 
a disregard of the law and a breach of a position of trust. He was 49 years old at that 
time. His questionable claim – that the only occasion in which he used marijuana since 
1997 resulted in him getting caught in a urinalysis test – does not dispel the security 
concerns. From the record evidence, I am unable to find that his drug abuse happened 
under unusual circumstances, is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. In making that finding, I note that I 
did not have the opportunity to observe his demeanor or assess his credibility. AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets forth the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
In 2011, Applicant pled guilty to theft and possession of stolen property charges. 
In 2010, he tested positive for marijuana on a urinalysis test while holding a security 
clearance. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 In 2011, Applicant stole railroad signs and other collectables from an old railroad 
and attempted to sell those items. He was caught attempting to sell the stolen property 
in an undercover police operation. He pled guilty to charges in two jurisdictions for this 
misconduct. Although he was required to pay restitution of $2,945 to the owner of the 
property, an unknown amount of other stolen property was recovered from his home 
during the undercover operation. The exact scope of the theft is unknown. Applicant 
complied with each court’s deferred judgment. His police record in State A for this 
 
8 
 
misconduct has been expunged. Nonetheless, this theft was a serious offense that 
raises questions about his trustworthiness. Additionally, the analysis of the Guideline H 
allegations applies equally here. Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude that 
Applicant will not engage in questionable conduct in the future.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant has worked for his current employer since June 2006. He is a 
valued employee. His employer recommends him for a security clearance. Considering 
the record evidence as a whole, however, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement and the theft. 
Applicant’s disregard for the law raises doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all the above reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant12 
    Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12 I found for Applicant on the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a because the alleged conduct was fully 
encompassed in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
