 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08546 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 7, 2014, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 31, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 20, 2015. He responded with documents that I have 
marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1 and 1(A) through 1(J). The case was assigned to me 
on June 23, 2015. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE 1 through 
1(J) are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2006. He served in the U.S. military from 1979 until he 
retired in 1999. He seeks to retain his security clearance. He is a high school graduate 
with some technical school training. He has been married for more than 27 years. He 
has two adult children and a teenage child.1   
 
Applicant’s wife was born in a foreign country. She became sick in 2006. She 
was eventually diagnosed with cancer. She was unable to work. She required stem cell 
transplants from her brother and mother. Applicant paid for his brother-in-law to travel 
from another part of the United States and for his mother-in-law to travel from the 
country where she lived. Applicant had to quit his part-time job to care for his wife. 
Applicant became sick in 2007. He was hospitalized and required surgery. He was on 
disability for three months. As Applicant struggled to pay his bills, the interest rates and 
penalties on his credit cards increased, which exacerbated his problem.2 
 
Applicant contracted with a debt-settlement company in August 2009 to assist 
him in resolving his debts. He enrolled 17 debts, totaling $114,624, in the company’s 
debt-resolution program (DRP). The debt-settlement company charged him 10% of his 
debt, or $11,462. The estimated duration of the DRP was 50 months. Applicant agreed 
to make 5 monthly payments of $917 to the debt-settlement company for their fees, 
followed by 45 monthly payments of $1,195. For months 6 through 17 of the DRP, $573 
went each month to the debt-settlement company for their fees, and $621 went each 
month to an escrow account. For months 18 through 50, the entire $1,195 was to go to 
the escrow account. The debt-settlement company agreed to negotiate settlements with 
his creditors and use the accumulated funds in the escrow account to pay the 
settlements.3  
 
Applicant retained a law firm in October 2011 to verify the accuracy of his 
accounts and dispute any inaccurate accounts. The debt-settlement company did not 
settle Applicant’s debts until they were verified by the law firm. Applicant settled 10 
debts through his debt-settlement company. Several of the debts in the DRP could not 
be verified by the law firm and were not settled.4 
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Items 1-3.  
 
3 Items 1-3.  
 
4 Items 1-3.  
 
 
3 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts with balances totaling about $58,576. The 
Government submitted credit reports from April 2014 and March 2015. None of the six 
debts are listed with a balance on either report. All of the debts alleged in the SOR were 
transferred from their original creditors. The credit reports list the collection company 
account for the transferred debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f as paid. The credit reports also 
established that the $17,346 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is Applicant’s wife’s debt. He 
was only an authorized user of the account. Four of the debts, totaling $51,936 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.d), are to the same bank. Applicant’s DRP included all the debts in the 
SOR. Four of the six debts alleged in the SOR have been settled and paid; one debt 
has been settled and is in the process of being paid; and the last debt is in Applicant’s 
current DRP to be addressed. Individual debts will be discussed below in the order they 
were settled.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $3,320 charged-off credit card account. The collection 
company handling the debt listed a $4,105 balance in July 2010. Applicant settled the 
debt for $2,052 through an initial $500 payment, followed by six monthly payments of 
$258. He completed the settlement payments in January 2011. Applicant submitted 
proof that the debt was resolved when he responded to DOHA interrogatories in June 
2014.6 
 
The $17,346 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is Applicant’s wife’s debt. The debt was 
settled in 2011 for $6,938 through the DRP. The settlement was paid through a $100 
payment and six monthly payments of $1,367. Applicant submitted proof that the debt 
was resolved when he responded to DOHA interrogatories in June 2014.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $3,320 charged-off credit card account. The collection 
company handling the debt listed a $7,372 balance in March 2012. Applicant settled the 
debt for $2,948 through five monthly payments of $525 and a final payment in August 
2012 of $323. Applicant documented this information in his response to DOHA 
interrogatories. The Government credit reports also note the collection company 
account as paid with a zero balance.8 
 
Applicant’s original debt-settlement company went out of business before he 
completed the DRP. He contracted with a different debt-settlement company in October 
2014. He enrolled five debts totaling $58,361 in the company’s DRP. The DRP included 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. Applicant agreed to pay the debt-
settlement company 21% of the balance of each debt when the debt is settled. 
Applicant agreed to pay $863 each month to the debt-settlement company.9 
                                                          
5 Items 1-5.  
 
6 Items 1-5; AE 1, 1(C).  
 
7 Items 1-5; AE 1, 1(B).  
 
8 Items 1-5; AE 1, 1(A).  
 
9 Items 1, 3; AE 1.  
 
 
4 
 
Applicant settled the $8,778 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for $2,828. The 
settlement amount was paid in February 2015 through a collection agent.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $20,171 charged-off credit card account. The original credit 
card company was acquired by the bank listed in the SOR. The debt was settled in May 
2015 for 13 monthly payments of $873. Applicant established that he made the first 
required payment in May 2015.11 
 
In summary, of the six debts alleged in the SOR, only five are Applicant’s 
responsibility. He provided documented proof in his response to interrogatories that he 
settled three of the debts between 2010 and 2012, including the account on which he 
was only an authorized user. He settled and paid a fourth debt in February 2015, and he 
is in the midst of the settlement payments for the fifth debt. The $5,641 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a is included in Applicant’s DRP, but it has not yet been settled.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 Items 1-5; AE 1, 1(D).  
 
11 Items 1-5; AE 1, 1(E).  
 
12 Items 1-5; AE 1.  
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s wife developed cancer in 2006. Her treatment spanned several years, 
and she was unable to work. Applicant paid for his brother-in-law to travel from another 
part of the United States and for his mother-in-law to travel from another country for 
stem cell transplants. Applicant had to quit his part-time job to care for his wife. He 
became sick in 2007 and missed several months of work. Those events were beyond 
his control.  
 
  Applicant contracted with a debt-settlement company in August 2009. He settled 
ten debts, including three of the six debts that were alleged in the SOR. That company 
went out of business, but he contracted with another company. He settled and paid a 
fourth debt, and he is making settlement payments on the fifth debt. The sixth debt is 
included in his DRP to be settled. 
 
  I find that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by conditions that were 
beyond his control. He acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. 
There are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), 
and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely applicable because Applicant 
is still in the process of resolving his last two debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, his stable work history, the 
factors that led to his financial problems, and the steps he has taken to remedy those 
problems. I am convinced his finances are sufficiently stable to warrant a security 
clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
