                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 12-04434
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns regarding his personal conduct. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudicative Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why
DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility
for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge
to determine whether a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 8, 2014, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 26, 2015, and responded to the FORM on
June 10, 2015 with an attached magistrate’s report covering Applicant’s complaint for
absolute divorce from the spouse he married in 1994. (Item 17) The case was assigned
to me on June 17, 2015.     
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) engaged in multiple overlapping
marriages between 1990 and 2014; (b) falsified his security clearance applications of
January 1992, February 2000, January 2005, March 2009, September 2009, and
December 2011, by deliberately failing to disclose his six months of military service in
the Marine Corps in 1984; (c) falsified his security clearance applications of March
2009, September 2009, and December 2011 by failing to disclose his employment
service with a company that he separated from in January 2005 under unfavorable
circumstances; (d) falsified his security clearance application of December 2011 by
failing to disclose his former spouses and sponsorship of foreign nationals; and (f)
falsified material facts during official interviews in 2006, 2012, and 2014, by failing to
disclose his overlapping spouses in his 2006 interview and employment termination in
2005 for cause in his ensuing 2012 and 2014 interviews. Additionally, Applicant
allegedly knowingly violated an employer’s code of conduct in November 2011 by
selling handicap placards to coworkers, and in January 2005 was terminated from a
former employer for falsifying his security check forms.
In his response to the SOR (Item 4), Applicant admitted some of the  allegations,
denied others, and provided clarifications to some of his answers furnished in the
security clearance applications he completed and answers he provided in DOD
interviews conducted in 2006, 2012 and 2014. Applicant provided attachments to his
response covering the status of his marriages and his dates of active military service.
(Item 3)
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 55-year-old security officer of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant has been married numerous times since 1990. (Items 4-6)  In his latest
e-QIP of December 2011, he listed only his current wife, who he married in August
2004. (Item 5) Based on information Applicant provided in a 2012 interview with an
agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and in his own response,
corroborated by court records, he has been married numerous times, with several of his
marriages overlapping with still active marriages. 
3
 Records support drawn inferences that Applicant married wife number one (wife
1) in August 1990, separated from her in May 1993, and achieved reinstatement of his
divorce petition in June 1993. (Item 4) Applicant provided documentation of a final
divorce from wife 1 in June 2003. (Items 4 and 6) 
In 1992, Applicant married wife number two (wife 2) and sponsored her for a
green card. (Items 4 and 6) His marriage to wife 2 overlapped with his marriage to wife
1, and he divorced wife 2 in December 1992, still legally married to wife 1. (Item 4) 
While still married to wife 1, Applicant married wife number three (wife 3) in 1994
and sponsored her for a green card. (Items 4 and 6) He petitioned for divorce against
wife 3 in 1996 and 1997, and was twice-denied in his petitions. (Items 4 and 6) Without
documented divorce, his marriage to wife 3 remains in effect. His pending petition for
divorce from wife 3 is currently pending in a circuit court within his state of residence.
(Item 17) 
Applicant married wife number 4 (wife 4) in April 2004, while still married to wife
1. (AEs 4 and 6) He sponsored her children in 2005 to come to the United States to live
with him and wife 4, who already had a green card. (Items 4 and 6) Applicant remained
married to wife 4 for over three years and petitioned for divorce in April 2007. (Item 4) In
his petition, he confirmed that he had been separated from wife 4 since January 2006,
and his petition for divorce from wife 4 was granted in July 2007 by a local court (Item
4), and in July 2009 by a court of the jurisdiction within his home state of residence.
(Item 10)  In October 2004, while still legally married to wife 3 and wife 4, Applicant
married wife number five (wife 5). Applicant remains married to wife 5, and his marriage
continues to overlap with his not concluded marriage to wife 3. (Items 4,  6, and 17) 
Applicant claimed no post-high school college education credits in his security
clearance applications.  Nor did he claim any technical school credits. (Items 5 and 11-
16)
Applicant’s employment history
Applicant has held security officer positions with various employers for the past
15 years.  Since November 2011, he has been employed by Company A as a security
officer. (Item 5) Between February 2009 and November 2011, he was employed by
Company B as a special police officer. (Item 5) He resigned his position after being
placed on unpaid administrative leave for allowing a co-worker to use his handicap
placard to park for free in a handicap space. (Item 5)
Before joining Company B, Applicant was employed by other defense
contractors. Between April 2008 and February 2009, he was employed by Company C
as a special police officer. He resigned his position in February 2009 to accept
employment with Company B. (Item 5) Applicant worked as a special police officer for
Company D between July 2007 and April 2008. (Item 5) Between November 2005 and
July 2007, he was employed by Company E as a special police officer and left the
employ of this company for a better job with Company D. (Items 5-7) With Company F,
4
he worked as a special police officer between September 2004 and May 2005 before
resigning his position in May 2005 after being placed on suspension for the assigned
reason of abandoning his post. (Items 15 and 6)
While employed by Company F, Applicant worked part-time for Company G.
Records document that Applicant worked as a special police officer for Company G
between November 2004 and January 2005. (Items 6 and 7) He was terminated by
Company G when his company’s DOD contract ended based on accepted reports that
he signed off for responsibility for an area during a second shift that he did not actually
work. (Items 6 and 7) 
Applicant’s military service
Throughout the security clearance application process, Applicant provided
different inclusive dates for his military service. (Items 5-7 and 11-16) Based on the
information he provided in April 2014 to an OPM agent, and corroborated by
information provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs (DOV) in September 2002,
Applicant entered military service in December 1981 and was released from active duty
in January 1982. (Items 3 and 6) When he could not complete basic training
requirements, he was separated from his Marine enlistment and granted an honorable
discharge. (Items 3 and  6)
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Between January 1992 and December 2011, Applicant completed a series of
security clearance applications, in which he omitted or misstated material information
about his marriages, employment suspensions and terminations, and military service. In
a December 2011 electronic questionnaires for investigation processing (e-QIP), he
omitted his prior military service completely, as well as his sponsorship of the children
of spouse number four for permanent residence in the United States, and his
employment suspensions and separations under adverse circumstances. (Items 5-7)  
In other e-QIPS he completed, Applicant made similar omissions and
misstatements. In the e-QIP he completed in January 1992, he omitted his military
service, answering “no” to question 13 that inquired about his military service.(Item 11)
In the e-QIPs he completed in February 2000, he misstated the year he served in the
Marine Corps, claiming military service in the Marine Corps between 1979 and 1984.
(Item 12)  Applicant misstated the inclusive dates of his military service as well in the
employment application he completed in February 2000. In this application he claimed
he served in the Marine Corps for approximately six months in 1984. (Item 13)
In addition to omitting and misstating the dates of his military service in the e-
QIPs he completed in 2000, Applicant either omitted or failed to accurately disclose his
prior employment suspensions and terminations in other security clearance
applications. For instance, in the e-QIP he completed in March 2009, he failed to
disclose his part-time employment with Company G and ultimate resignation from
Company F under unfavorable circumstances. (Items 15 and 6)  
5
Between February 2006 and April 2014, Applicant was interviewed on several
occasions by agents of the OPM. (Items 6 and 7) In his 2006 interview, he misstated
the circumstances of his separations from certain employment relationships and did not
accurately explain the disciplinary actions taken by several of his employers and
separations under unfavorable circumstances before being confronted by the
interviewing agents.  (Items 6 and 7) In OPM interviews he submitted to in 2012 and
2014, he failed to disclose his overlapping marriages before he was confronted by the
interviewing agent.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s multiple omissions,
inconsistencies, and misstatements he made in his e-Qips, employment applications,
and OPM interviews, inferences are warranted that his multiple omissions and
misstatements were either made deliberately or recklessly without any regard for the
accuracy of his statements. Applicant’s claims and explanations about his alleged
omissions and misstatements were thoroughly assessed and considered, but could not
be reconciled with the omissions and statements he made in his e-QIPs, employment
applications, and OPM interviews.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
6
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
              Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
7
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s overlapping marriages and
multiple omissions and misstatements he made in his e-QIPs, employment
applications, and OPM interviews over a period of years. These multiple omissions and
misstatements cannot  be reconciled with factual findings in the developed record.  All
of the addressed concerns cover questions of poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness raised under Guideline E.
Overlapping marriages
Most of Applicant’s marriages overlapped over a number of years. While none
of these marriages are alleged to create violations of the criminal law of Applicant’s
state of residence, they do contravene his state’s longstanding bigamy law. Section
502(b) of Title 10 of his state’s bigamy law makes bigamy a felony, punishable by
incarceration not to exceed nine years for violations. Section 502(b) prohibits a person
from entering into a marriage ceremony with another while lawfully married to a living
person. Applicant’s proven overlapping marriages fall clearly within the proscribed acts
of marriage in section 502(b)
Because the overlapping marriage allegations are made under Guideline E, and
not Guideline J, it is not clear whether the Government considered Applicant’s
explanations of his overlapping marriages cleared him of any knowing and wilful
violation of Section 502(b) Considering all of the circumstances of his multiple
marriages under the governing bigamy law of his jurisdiction, his actions at the very
least reflect judgment lapses indicative of untrustworthiness and unreliability concerns
covered by Guideline E.
Based on current understandings of the institution of marriage in Applicant’s
state of residence and nationally, Applicant’s determined overlapping marriages place
him at risk to potential prosecution of his state’s bigamy law. His actions warrant
conclusions that he displayed poor judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability in his
failure to exercise greater care and responsibility in utilizing his state’s marriage and
divorce laws to ensure his current marriages were concluded before applying for
marriage licenses to authorize new ones. Security concerns associated with
Applicant’s overlapping marriages are not mitigated.
e-QIP omissions and misstatements
In the process of completing a series of e-QIPs and employment applications
between 1992 and 2011, Applicant committed multiple omissions and misstatements
about his marriages, his employment history, and his military history. Applicant’s claims
8
and explanations about his state of mind cannot be reconciled with his collective
actions. Considered together under all of the circumstances, Applicant’s multiple
omissions and misstatements reflect knowing and wilful omissions and misstatements
that raise security concerns under Guideline E.
One of the disqualifying conditions covered by Guideline E is applicable.  DC ¶
16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts to any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.”  DC ¶ 16(a) may be considered in evaluating Applicant’s multiple e-
QIP omissions and misstatements about his marriages, employment history, and
military history.
Traditional assessments of falsification in ISCR proceedings include
considerations of motive in determining whether particular applicants engaged in
knowing and willful concealment. Both Guideline E and relevant case authorities
underscore the importance of motive and subjective intent considerations in gauging
knowing and willful behavior. See ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6,
2006)(citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See,  generally, United
States v. Chapin, 515 F.2d 1274, 1283-84 (D.C. Cir. 1975); United States v. Steinhilber,
484 F.2d 386, 389-90 (8  Cir. 1973); United States v. Diogo, 320 F.2d 898, 905 (2d Cir.th
1963). 
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions and
misstatements were repeated in security and employment applications over a period
spanning almost 20 years and reflect conscious attempts to conceal adverse
information associated with his marriage, employment relationships, and military
service. None of his multiple omissions and misstatements can be reconciled with
actions indicative of mistake or misunderstanding. Credibility assessments are
necessarily limited to the facts developed on the record without any oral input from a
hearing to alter impressions developed from the documented exhibits.  
To the extent mitigating considerations are necessary to correct any judgment
lapses associated with Applicant’s responses to the questions in his completed e-QIPs,
employment applications, and OPM interviews about his marriages, employment history
and military history, MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the
facts,” if available to Applicant, could potentially undue the adverse effects of his
determined deliberate omissions and misstatements. However, his OPM interview
summaries do not reveal any good-faith corrections from Applicant until he was
confronted by the interviewing OPM agent.  MC ¶ 17(a) is not available to Applicant
under these circumstances. 
Nor is MC ¶ 17(c), “ the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment,” is not available to Applicant. His multiple omissions and
9
misstatements are neither minor nor aged by time, and they continue to reflect
judgment and trust lapses incompatible with eligibility to hold a security clearance. 
From a whole-person assessment, Applicant is entitled to some recognition for
the months he served in the Marine Corps in 1981-1982.  In appreciation of his
service, he received an honorable discharge. However, Applicant’s multiple judgment
lapses associated with (a) his certain marriages and past employment relationships
and (b) his omissions and misstatements in his e-QIPs, employment applications, and
OPM interviews more than outweigh his service contributions. 
Endorsements, performance evaluations, and evidence of community and civic
contributions could have been helpful to an in-depth whole-person assessment, but
were not provided. Applicant’s actions are not supportive of an overall reliability and
trustworthiness assessment necessary to meet security clearance eligibility
requirements.  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s omissions and
misstatements in the e-QIPs, employment applications, OPM interviews before
confrontation, and whole-person assessment, Applicant’s multiple omissions and
misstatements reflect knowing and wilful actions on his part which are not mitigated. In
making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the respective
burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through
1.w. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):      AGAINST APPLICANT
    Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.w:              Against Applicant
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
10
                                        
  
