 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03565 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 3, 2014, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 26, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 20, 2015. He responded with a letter that I have marked 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2015. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served in the U.S. military from 1981 until he 
retired in 2001. He seeks to retain his security clearance. He is a high school graduate. 
He has been married for more than 30 years. He has two adult children and a teenage 
child.1   
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts with balances totaling about $38,750. 
Each debt is listed on at least one credit report.2 Applicant admitted owing the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, but he stated that he settled the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a, and he was making monthly payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
through 1.d. He denied owing the remaining debts.3    
 
Applicant’s wife is from another country. Applicant’s brother-in-law and father-in-
law died within a year of each other. Applicant attributed his financial problems to 
paying for his wife to travel to the foreign country for their funerals and paying for his 
father-in-law’s funeral. Applicant has been steadily employed since his retirement from 
the military.4   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $22,642 charged-off student loan that Applicant cosigned for 
his daughter. His daughter stopped making payments on the loan. In August 2014, the 
collection company handling the debt agreed to settle it for $9,050. Applicant stated that 
he withdrew the funds from his 401(k) retirement account to pay the settlement. He did 
not provide corroborating documentation.5 
 
Applicant admitted owing the $7,599 delinquent credit card account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. The credit reports show a date of last action on the account of December 
2010. Applicant did not list any delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86), which he attributed to an oversight.6 During his background 
interview in March 2013, Applicant stated the creditor obtained a judgment against him 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 7.  
 
2 “Credit reports are generally sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case of Guideline F 
security concerns.” See ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2012). 
 
3 Items 2, 5, 6. 
 
4 Items 2, 7; AE A.  
 
5 Items 2, 5-7; AE A.  
 
6 Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes, but may be 
considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and when 
conducting the whole-person analysis.  
 
3 
 
and was garnishing his wages. He stated that he would satisfy the debt by January 
2014. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he was making monthly 
payments toward the debt. He submitted an August 2014 letter from the law firm 
handling the judgment. It indicated that Applicant agreed to pay $200 per month toward 
the $11,468 balance of the judgment. The judgment is earning 10% interest. Applicant 
did not submit any documentation establishing that he has been making the monthly 
payments.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $5,524 delinquent debt to a bank. The April 2014 credit 
report lists the date of last action on the account as September 2009. Applicant told the 
background investigator in March 2013 that he was paying $200 per month to the bank. 
He stated that he would satisfy the debt by 2015. In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that he was making monthly payments toward the debt. He submitted an August 
2014 letter from the collection company handling the debt. It indicated that Applicant 
agreed to pay $200 per month toward the $6,501 balance of the debt. Applicant did not 
submit any documentation establishing that he has been making the monthly 
payments.8 
 
Applicant stated that he is making monthly payments toward the $1,648 
delinquent credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. The February 2013 credit report 
listed the account as current with a $1,399 balance. The April 2014 credit report listed 
the account as $251 past due with a $1,648 balance. Applicant submitted 
documentation establishing that the account is current without a past-due amount.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $710 debt to a collection company. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a 
delinquent $510 credit card debt. These two allegations represent the same debt: the 
original credit card account and the collection company account after the debt was 
transferred. Applicant denied owing both debts. The debts are listed on the 2013 and 
2014 credit reports. Both reports listed that the SOR ¶ 1.e debt had been disputed, but 
the credit reporting agency continued to report the debt, noting the information met the 
requirements of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). Applicant denied knowledge of 
both debts during his background interview in March 2013.10 
 
Applicant denied owing the $117 debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
court in the state where Applicant lives (SOR ¶ 1.g). The debt is listed on the February 
2013 credit report, but not the April 2014 credit report.11 
 
                                                          
7 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
8 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
9 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
10 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
11 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
 
4 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. In the FORM, 
Department Counsel notified Applicant of the importance of corroborating his 
statements with documents. In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided a 
memorandum but no documents.12   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
12 Items 2, 5-7; AE A.  
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and1.f allege the same debt. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶ 1.f is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant attributed his financial problems to the expenses related to the 
overseas funerals of his brother-in-law and father-in-law. Additionally, his daughter did 
not pay the student loan he cosigned for her. Those events were beyond his control.  
 
  Applicant established that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is current. He denied 
owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is not 
listed on the most recent credit report. The credit reporting agency listed the SOR ¶ 1.e 
debt as disputed, but it continued to report the debt, noting the information met the 
requirements of the FCRA. Applicant stated the student loan in SOR ¶ 1.a has been 
settled. He stated that he has been making payments toward the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, but he did not submit any documentation establishing that he has been 
making the monthly payments. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a 
Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific 
debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
  Even if I give Applicant credit for settling the student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
the three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e are unresolved. There is insufficient 
evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial problems will be resolved within a 
reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not 
applicable to the unresolved debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is only 
applicable to the disputed debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. However, he has unresolved financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
