 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04996 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 22, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA).1 Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 14, 2014, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F.  
                                                          
1 The SCA was a Questionnaire for National Security Positions. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
On December 9, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 30, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 5. On May 14, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM 
and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections or supply additional 
information. On June 8, 2015, she submitted a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on June 26, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had five debts totaling about $10,276 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.e). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b 
and admitted the remaining debts. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old information technology specialist who has been 
working for a federal contractor since August 2013. She graduated from high school in 
1986. She has never been married, but indicated she lives with a cohabitant. She has 
two children, ages 16 and 17. This is the first time that she is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance.3 
 
In her SCA, Applicant listed five periods of unemployment, including a 33-month 
period prior to obtaining her current job. She was unemployed from February 2004 to 
March 2004; June 2005 to August 2005; March 2009 to January 2010; March 2010 to 
April 2010; and December 2010 to August 2013. She was laid off from jobs for each of 
these periods with the exception of a short period of unemployment (March 2010 to 
April 2010) when she left a job for personal reasons.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $787. This was a credit card account that had 
a date of last activity of March 2009. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that 
she made several attempts to contact the creditor. She learned the creditor is no longer 
in business and is apparently in a liquidated trust. She indicated that she intended to 
dispute this debt. It no longer appears on her most recent credit report dated October 
24, 2014.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b –collection account for $7,686. This debt arose from an apartment 
lease. It was assigned for collection in September 2009 and constitutes almost 75% of 
the alleged indebtedness. In her interview with an Office of Personnel Management 
                                                          
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Items 1, 2; Response to the FORM. 
 
5 Items 1, 4, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
(OPM) investigator, her Answer to the SOR, and her Response to the FORM, Applicant 
stated that she paid this debt. Her monthly rent for that apartment was $1,995. She fell 
behind on two months of rent. She indicated that, before she vacated the premises, she 
hand delivered to the manager a cashier’s check for over $4,000, which included the 
rent payments and late fees. In 2011, she was contacted by a representative of the 
collection agency requesting payment. She then submitted a copy of the cashier’s 
check showing proof of payment. She heard nothing further from the creditor and 
thought the matter was closed. She now is unable to locate a copy of the cashier’s 
check.6  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e – collection accounts totaling $1,803. In her Response to the 
FORM, Applicant provided copies of letters she sent to each creditor in May 2015 
requesting documentation to verify these debts. She indicated that she has not received 
any responses from the creditors. These debts are no longer reflected on her most 
recent credit report dated October 24, 2014.7 
 
 Applicant had a state tax lien that was filed against her in January 2010. She 
explained that the state claimed it had not received her 2007 income tax return. She 
had filed that tax return. She refiled in 2010. The tax lien was released in June 2011 and 
she received a refund for that year.8  
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report reflected that she had no delinquent debts 
other than the debt reflected in SOR ¶ 1.b. She stated that she adjusted her lifestyle 
when she was laid off, disposed of her credit cards, and only purchased what she could 
afford. In her Response to the FORM, she stated that she recently obtained a secured 
credit card and pays the balance in full each billing cycle.9 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3, Response to FORM. 
 
7 Items 1, 3, Response to FORM. 
 
8 Items 1, 3, Response to FORM. 
 
9 Items 1, 3, Response to FORM. 
 
 
4 
 
 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, which is approximately 75% of the 
alleged debt. She claimed that she paid that debt in 2009 and later provided a collection 
agency a copy of the cashier’s check in 2011 as proof of the payment. She no longer 
has a copy of the cashier’s check, which is understandable, because she submitted it 
six years ago. This is the only delinquent debt that appears in her most recent credit 
report. Considering this debt was incurred six years ago and her claim that she paid it, I 
find that this debt occurred under circumstances that make it unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 The remaining debts are relatively minor and no longer appear on Applicant’s 
credit report. She requested each creditor provide her verification of the debt and had 
not received any responses from them by the time she submitted her Response to the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant was laid off from jobs and experienced a number of periods of 
unemployment, including a 33-month period before starting her current job. When she 
was laid off, she adjusted her lifestyle and lived within her means. Although she most 
likely could have taken quicker action to resolve the debts after obtaining her current 
job, she has acted in a reasonable manner in addressing them. Her financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. Each of the mitigating conditions applies in 
varying degrees.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.10 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information in the record 
                                                          
10 The nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
about Applicant and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, outweighs the security concerns at issue. Applicant met her burden of 
persuasion and mitigated the financial security concerns. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to her eligibility for a security clearance.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e:   For Applicant 
     
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
