 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01834 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 2, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA).1 
Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) on June 27, 2014, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  
 
                                                          
1 The SCA was a Questionnaire for National Security Positions. 
 
 
2 
 
 
In an undated document, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 12, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 5. On March 23, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections or supply additional 
information. She did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on June 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in August 2001 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and that she had 12 delinquent debts totaling about $51,870 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-
1.m). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($832) and 
1.i ($399) and admitted the remaining allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been 
working for that contractor since October 2003. She graduated from high school in 1995 
and received a certificate from a vocational institute in 1996. She married in 1996 and 
divorced in 2010. She married her current spouse in 2011. She has one child, age 18. 
She was granted a security clearance in June 2010.3 
 
In 2001, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was dismissed later that 
year. The amount of her assets and liabilities when she filed that bankruptcy is 
unknown. The reason for dismissal of the bankruptcy is unknown. In her Answer to the 
SOR, she noted this bankruptcy was filed during her first marriage, but provided no 
other explanation of the circumstances that prompted the filing of that bankruptcy.4 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a letter dated August 4, 2014, 
reflecting that her government student loan (SOR ¶ 1.c) was paid. In her SCA, she 
indicated that her wages were garnished for payment of her student loan. The debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.i, which Applicant denied, is not reflected in the two credit reports submitted or 
in other record evidence.  
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant failed to explain the reasons for her financial 
problems. She also did not provide any evidence showing that she paid or otherwise 
resolved any of the alleged debts except for the student loan discussed above.5 
                                                          
2 Items 1, 2. 
 
3 Item 3.  
 
4 Items 1, 2. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s credit report dated February 27, 2015, reflected that she filed Chapter 
13 bankruptcy on November 26, 2014. It is unknown whether this bankruptcy covers 
each alleged debt; whether a Chapter 13 Plan has been approved; or whether she is 
making regular payments under such a plan.6  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that she received financial counseling. She did 
not provide a monthly budget. It is unknown whether she has any discretionary income 
remaining each month after payment of her expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
                                                          
6 Item 4.  
 
4 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
Applicant admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant paid her government student loan. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.c.  
Insufficient evidence was presented to establish the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i.   
 
 For the remaining debts, none of the mitigating conditions are established. There 
is no evidence that her financial problems were incurred due to conditions beyond her 
control or under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. There is no evidence that 
she received financial counseling or acted responsibly in addressing her unresolved 
delinquent debts. She provided no documentation showing she has a legitimate basis 
for disputing any debts. Her financial problems continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
 
6 
 
 
a determination.7 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information does not outweigh the 
security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion. Her 
financial problems raise doubts about her eligibility to access classified information. 
Following the Egan decision and the “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance must be 
resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph   1.c:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph   1.i:   For Applicant 
    Subparagraphs 1.j – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
