 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-02378 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant solicited prostitutes multiple times between 1992 and 1996, and 
between 2009 and 2012 while residing in Europe. He provided no evidence to mitigate 
sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. Another government agency 
denied him access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI), based on his 
misconduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 13, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline G, Sexual Behavior, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 2, 2014 (Answer), and requested the 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 26, 2015, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing four Items 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on March 26, 2015. Applicant received the 
FORM on April 26, 2015, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections to the 
FORM and submit additional information. He did not submit any additional 
documentation. On June 24, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR. His admissions are 
accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he was hired 
in 2006. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1986. He was married to his first wife in 1987 
and was divorced in 1992. He married his second wife in 1996. (GE 2.)   
  
 Applicant admitted in his Answer that on multiple occasions between 1992 and 
1996, he solicited the services of prostitutes. Between 2009 and 2012, he solicited the 
services of prostitutes while traveling and residing in a European country. He stated that 
his interactions with the prostitutes were private, consensual and discreet. As a 
consequence of his behaviors, another government agency denied him access to 
Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) in 2013.  
 
 Applicant stated that his wife is aware of his indiscretions. He regrets being 
unable to continue assisting soldiers in his position and is disappointed in himself. 
(Answer.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
 
 
3 
 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
4 
 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; and 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
Applicant admitted that on multiple occasions he engaged in criminal conduct by 
soliciting prostitutes between 1992 and 1996, and between 2009 and 2012. The 
evidence raises a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 13(a). Due to the nature of the 
behavior, he may be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. The evidence 
establishes a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 13(c). 
 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
Applicant’s improper sexual behavior, which continued into 2012, cannot be 
considered as happening so long ago, given that his pattern of soliciting prostitutes 
occurred during two different periods of time, for a total of about six years. AG ¶ 14(b) 
does not apply. Although his wife is aware of his indiscretions, there is no evidence that 
his supervisor, other employees, or members of the public know of his misconduct. The 
behavior remains a basis for exploitation; hence, AG ¶ 14(c) does not apply. Applicant 
stated that his misbehavior was private, consensual, and discreet. AG ¶ 14(d) has 
limited application, as his assertions are uncorroborated and prostitutes are often 
coerced into engaging in sexual activity for a third party’s financial gain.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
Applicant’s pattern and history of sexual misconduct creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation or duress because it is the type of behavior which, if known, would be likely 
to adversely affect his personal and professional standing in the community. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise a disqualification under AG ¶ 16(e).  
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s personal conduct: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
The evidence does not establish any of the above mitigating conditions. 
Applicant’s conduct is not minor, as it occurred multiple times over a total of six years, 
and it casts doubt on his trustworthiness and good judgment. Although he admitted his 
transgressions, he did not present evidence of positive actions he has taken to alleviate 
the stressors or factors that contributed to the misconduct. Because Applicant has not 
provided evidence that he disclosed the information regarding his sexual misconduct to 
his supervisor or others, he has not taken basic positive steps to reduce his vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 17(c), (d), or (e) was 
not established. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 51-year-old 
man, who has worked for a defense contractor since 2006. He engaged in serious 
sexual misconduct for about six years and produced no persuasive evidence of 
rehabilitation or other behavioral changes that would diminish the likelihood of 
recurrence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his sexual behavior and personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
7 
 
 
                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
