1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-04818 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. DOD issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated January 20, 2015, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 11, 2015, admitting all 13 allegations 
of delinquent debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 22, 2015, 
and the case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. DOD issued a notice of hearing on 
May 18, 2015, scheduling a hearing for June 2, 2015. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered five exhibits that I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5. Applicant 
testified but did not submit any exhibits. I kept the record open for Applicant to submit 
documents. Applicant did not submit any documents. I received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on June 9, 2015. The record closed on July 6, 2015, after the time for 
Applicant to submit post-hearing documents expired.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 30 years old and has been employed as an information technology 
specialist for a defense contractor since May 2012. He graduated from a technical 
school in 2004 with an associate’s degree in computer science. He is single but has a 
daughter for whom he provides child support. Applicant reports that his net monthly 
income is approximately $2,500 after deductions of $300 each for child support and 
garnishment for student loans. Applicant did not provide any documents verifying his 
child support payments or student loan garnishment. His monthly expenses are 
approximately $1,600, leaving $900 monthly in discretionary funds. (Tr. 10-12, 19-22, 
38-39, 48-49: GX 1, e-QIP, dated December 3, 2013) 
 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (GX 2, dated January 22, 2014; GX 3, dated 
March 13, 2014; GX 4, dated December 22, 2014; and GX 5, dated April 22, 2015) 
confirm the following debts for Applicant: a judgment on a medical debt from a hospital 
for $2,387 (SOR 1.a); a second judgment from the same hospital for $2,192 (SOR 1.b); 
a third judgment from a different hospital for $805 (SOR 1.c); a fourth judgment from a 
different hospital for $164 (SOR 1.d); two charged-off student loans for $15,979 (SOR 
1.e) and $12,112 (SOR 1.f); three medical accounts placed for collection by the same 
creditor for $563 (SOR 1.g), $265 (SOR 1.h), and $234 (SOR 1.i); a fitness center debt 
placed for collection for $2,548 (SOR 1.j); another medical account placed for collection 
for $1,064 (SOR 1.j)1; a cable television debt placed for collection for $168 (SOR 1.k); 
and a medical account placed for collection for $130 (SOR 1.l). Department Counsel 
researched the debts and determined that the medical debt in SOR 1.b was not 
Applicant’s debt but his father’s debt. Department Counsel withdrew allegation SOR 1.b. 
The total amount of the delinquent debt after the withdrawal of allegation SOR 1.b is 
approximately $36,000 with $28,000 of the delinquent debt in two student loans.  
 
Applicant used student loans to pay for his technical school education. Applicant, 
and not his parents, signed for the student loans. Applicant testified that his parents 
                                            
1There are two SOR allegations 1.j in the SOR. I have not renumbered the allegations in 
Applicant’s SOR. Each debt will be discussed separately.  
3 
 
promised him a college education, and he thought his parents were paying the student 
loans. He was living at home with his parents when he discovered a student loan 
delinquency notice addressed to him. He confronted his parents and learned they were 
not paying, nor could they pay, the student loans. He tried to reach an agreement with 
the creditors but they wanted him to pay monthly more than he could afford. Applicant 
contends that his pay has been garnished for several years and his tax refunds were 
used to pay the student loan debts. He also notes that even with these payments the 
amount of the student loans seems to be larger rather than smaller. He believes the 
principle balance on the loans was $3,000 to $4,000, not the almost $12,000 to $35,000 
now reported. He has not made any student loan payments, except garnishment, and 
he does not know the amount his parents may have paid. (Tr. 49-54) 
 
Applicant was hospitalized just before moving to a new location. He did not 
provide a change of address so mail was not forwarded to him. He did not receive a 
hospital bill from any medical creditor. Since he did not pay his medical debts, the 
creditors entered judgments against him. He does not remember incurring any other 
medical debts but he does remember visiting hospitals for treatment. He has not paid 
any of the medical debts alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 35-37) 
 
Applicant notes that he has not been taught about debt management. He tried 
working with some banks but was unable to make arrangements for loans to pay his 
debts. He knew his finances were a security clearance issue since he completed the e-
QIP in December 2013 and talked to a security investigator in March 2014. (Tr. 17-28) 
 
Applicant claims that his pay has been garnished for approximately three years 
to pay his student loans. He has also forfeited about $1,500 in tax refunds each year for 
at least three years. However even with these payments, his student loans have not 
decreased but increased. He has steadily for many years payed his child support by 
automatic payroll deduction. Applicant believes he can pay $400 monthly towards his 
student loans and other debts. (Tr. 29-40). 
 
Applicant’s only contact with creditors was his one unsuccessful attempt to reach 
an agreement on the student loans. He spoke to a debt counselor only two weeks 
before the hearing. The debt counselor is still researching Applicant’s financial issues 
before recommending a course of action. (Tr. 40-48 
 
Applicant provided no documents to verify any action or payment taken in regard 
to his debts. I left the record open for Applicant to have a reasonable opportunity to 
resolve his debts. Department Counsel and I provided Applicant, on the record, advice 
on how to start to resolve the financial issues since he stated he did not know how to 
begin and had never been taught good financial traits. He was advised to contact his 
creditors, pay some of the debt since he reported $900 monthly in discretionary funds, 
and determine the status of the student loans. Applicant provided no information after 
the hearing. (Tr. 57-65) 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
5 
 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Security clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk of acting inconsistently 
with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is 
required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial obligations.  
 
It is well-settled that adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the 
substantial evidence standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s history of 
delinquent debts is documented in his credit reports, his SOR responses, and his 
testimony at the hearing. Applicant admits to delinquent debts verified by credit reports 
that he has not paid or attempted to resolve. The delinquent debts raise the following 
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.; 
 
 Applicant has significant delinquent debt that has not been addressed or 
resolved. The evidence indicates a history of both an inability and an unwillingness to 
satisfy debt.  
 
I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant signed for student loans to further his education. Even though he 
thought his parents would pay the student loans as promised, he was primarily 
responsible for the loans. When he learned that the loans were not being paid, he failed 
to take any action to pay or resolve the loans. He incurred medical debts for his 
personal treatments that have not been paid or resolved. He also has other consumer 
debts he has not paid. He made only limited contact with the student loan creditors 
about his debts. He claims that his pay has been garnished and his tax refunds used to 
pay student loans. He failed to provide any documents to verify his claims.  
 
Applicant’s debts are current and multiple. His delinquent debt did not happen 
under unusual or unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur but are based on his 
failure to take the action required of him to manage his financial issues. All of his 
financial issues were within his control to resolve. Applicant has not shown that he 
manages his personal financial obligations reasonably and responsibly, and his 
irresponsible financial conduct is likely to continue. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not apply. 
 
Applicant did not present any information that he sought or received financial 
counseling. The financial problems are not being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. For a good-faith effort, there must be an ability to 
repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good 
faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts is needed. 
Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track 
record of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or 
reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts in the 
future is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting 
in a financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable 
plan to resolve financial problems and has taken significant action to implement that 
plan.  
 
Applicant has not paid any of his debts or established a plan to pay his debts. 
Applicant stated that he needed assistance and advice to determine how to best resolve 
his delinquent debts. After being provided at the hearing with guidance and advice, 
Applicant still did not provide any information on any action he took to resolve his debts. 
Applicant has not established a meaningful track record of debt payment. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply. 
 
7 
 
Applicant has not presented any information to show he acted reasonably and 
responsibly toward his debts. He has not presented any information to verify payments 
made on his debts. Applicant has not presented a systematic plan to resolve debts. He 
has not established a meaningful track record of debt payments. His promise to pay in 
the future is not sufficient to show an adherence to his financial obligations. With 
evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation to support responsible management 
of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control or 
that his delinquent debts have been resolved or are being resolved. His lack of financial 
action does not show that he will act in good faith with adherence to his financial 
obligations, or that he has or will act responsibly and reasonably to resolve his financial 
issues. There is ample evidence of irresponsible behavior, lack of good judgment, and 
unreliability. Applicant's lack of documented action is significant and disqualifying. His 
failure to act reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an indication that he 
may not act reasonably and responsibly to protect and safeguard classified information. 
Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to establish that he acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances. 
His financial track record does not establish confidence that he has or will responsibly 
manage his financial obligations or follow rules and regulations. This indicates that he 
may not be concerned or act responsibly in regard to classified information. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security concerns arising 
8 
 
under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Withdrawn 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
