KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge reasonably explained why the mitigating evidence was insufficient to
overcome all the government’s security concerns.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-0918.a1
DATE: 07/08/2015
DATE: July 8, 2015
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01918
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 2, 2014, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On April 29, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals  Administrative Judge
Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.
Applicant contends that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because the Judge
did not correctly weigh the evidence. Specifically, she argues that the Judge should have given “a
little more weight” to evidence that her financial problems were due her husband’s loss of
employment, and her and her husband’s medical problems.  Applicant’s Brief at 2.   As part of her
submission on appeal, she offers new evidence in the form of  a statement that she has retained an
attorney to file for bankruptcy on her behalf, and will be increasing her monthly installment
payments to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on her outstanding tax debt.  The Board cannot
consider this new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as
a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for
a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-08308 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011).
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy history of not meeting financial
obligations, including failing to file Federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2012.  Decision at 2-3. 
While the Judge considered the fact that Applicant’s financial problems “were mostly attributable”
to her husband’s medical problems and loss of work, he also noted that she had “not developed any
meaningful payment plan or other means for resolving her remaining debts,” had “not followed up
with contacts of her creditors,” and had “resisted proceeding with her petition for Chapter 7
bankruptcy relief.”  Id. at 5-6.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that
Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  
The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and
seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors. He found in favor of Applicant with respect to some of the allegations, but
reasonably explained why the mitigating evidence was insufficient to overcome all of the
government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge
examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
2
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision under is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
