The record  consists of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-3, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-E.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
      )
XXXX, Xxxxxxx Xxxxxx    )      ISCR Case No. 14-04836
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alfred Deas, Jr., Personal Representative
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 6 January 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued an SOR to
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.2
Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 13 April 2015, and I
convened a hearing 27 May 2015. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 4 June 2015.
The balance on which had grown to $12,737,3
Applicant had missed the application window for his employer-sponsored health plan and thus had to pay the4
medical bills by himself (Tr. 87).
2
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.d, which he denied,
claiming, without corroboration, that the debt had been paid. He is a 26-year-old
industrial security specialist employed as a defense contractor since December 2013.
He was previously employed with another defense contractor as a security officer from
August 2007 to December 2013. Applicant seeks to retain the clearance he has held
since January 2009.
The SOR alleges and Government exhibits (GE 1-3) establish four delinquent
debts totaling nearly $25,000. Applicant admits three debts totaling $24,400: two
automobile repossessions (SOR 1.a for $12,309; SOR 1.b for 11,075) and an unpaid
tuition bill dating back to 2007 (SOR 1.c for $1,028). Applicant reported the
repossessions on his January 2014 clearance application (GE 1).
On 18 May 2015, Applicant claimed to have reached repayment agreements with
the creditors on the two repossessions. He claimed, without corroboration, to have
agreed to pay $200 monthly beginning 1 June 2015 on SOR debt 1.a (Tr. 51). He also
claimed, without corroboration, that the collection agent agreed to reduce the balance
due from about $10,000 to $6,000 (Tr. 29). He agreed to pay $150 monthly beginning 1
June 2015 on SOR debt 1.b (AE B).  Applicant has had no contact with the community3
college or its collection agent since leaving school in 2007, and the account has now
aged off his credit report. Applicant has no plans to address this account since it has
aged off his credit report (Tr. 59-60).
 Applicant acknowledged that he had been young and naive about his finances
(Tr. 37). When he got behind on his payments on his first car loan (SOR 1.b) because of
mechanical issues with the car, he voluntarily surrendered it to the lender in September
2011 (Tr. 41-42). However, he made no effort to communicate with the lender or its
collection agent regarding any balance due until after he received the SOR. He got
behind on his second car loan (SOR 1.a) in part because he had some minor health
issues for which he did not have health insurance.  That car was involuntarily4
repossessed in September 2013 (Tr. 46). He made no effort to communicate with this
lender or its collection agent regarding any balance due until after he received the SOR.
 
       In March 2015, Applicant bought a 2015 vehicle for $24,000. He financed the
vehicle over 63 months at 18% interest (Tr. 61). His monthly payment is $550 (AE C), of
which he has made one.
Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling. His budget (AE C)
shows sufficient positive cash flow to meet his repayment plans (Tr. 39). His supervisor
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;6
3
 
considers him honest and trustworthy, but does not appear to have any knowledge of
Applicant’s financial problems (AE E). Applicant’s co-worker considers him honest and
trustworthy, but has no knowledge of Applicant’s financial problems (Tr. 67-68). A long-
time family friend considers him honest, trustworthy, and reliable, and is generally
aware that Applicant has financial problems (Tr. 71-73). Applicant’s mother considers
him honest, open, and trustworthy, but is aware that he has made some poor financial
choices (Tr. 76-79).
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has delinquent debt dating
back to at least 2007 that he has not addressed despite possessing the apparent
means to do so.6
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that7
it is  unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and8
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;9
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications10
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
4
 
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide little help to Applicant.
His financial difficulties are recent and not infrequent, and the stated cause cannot be
considered unlikely to recur because mechanical problems with vehicles and routine
medical issues are commonplace occurrences.  Such commonplace occurrences7
cannot be considered circumstances beyond his control, but even if they could be so
considered, Applicant has not been responsible in dealing with his debts. He apparently
walked away from his unpaid tuition with no intention of ever paying it. He began
addressing the two repossessions only after receiving the SOR, within days of his
scheduled hearing.  He provided no corroboration of the claimed January 2015 vehicle8
ticket. Consequently, these repayment efforts, for which the first payment is not yet due,
do not constitute a good-faith effort to repay his debts.9
In addition, Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling. His budget,
which includes his $550 vehicle payment, shows over $1,000 positive monthly cash
flow, without including any payments on his claimed repayment plans. However, given
that on two other occasions Applicant was unable to complete an installment schedule,
there is no particular reason to believe that Applicant will keep current on three
installment plans. Moreover, these repayment schedules are recently made, with no
track record of payment. He made no effort to pay his education debt for eight years,
and now that it has aged off his credit report, he has demonstrated no interest in paying
this debt. Consequently, it is not clear that the problem is being resolved.10
The concern with Applicant is that while he may credibly state his intent to avoid
financial problems in the future, and he may have the means overall to do so now, he
does not actually have any track record of doing so. Further, Applicant’s character and
employment evidence which reasonably support a “whole person” analysis in favor of
granting his clearance is inadequate in this case to overcome the security concerns
raised by his track record of financial irresponsibility. I conclude Guideline F against
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-d: Against Applicant
5
 
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
