KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Federal agencies and their employees are entitled to a presumption of good faith and
regularity in the performance of their duties.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-00996.a1
DATE: 07/16/2015
DATE: July 16, 2015
In Re:
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00996
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
2, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel moved to amend the
SOR, and that amendment was granted.  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 19, 2015, after
the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Francisco
Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  Department Counsel cross-appealed pursuant to the same
provisions. 
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether there is sufficient evidence to
support the Judge’s formal finding under SOR subparagraph 1.(a)1; (2) whether a Report of
Investigation was properly admitted into the evidence by the Judge; and (3) whether Applicant was
denied due process.  Department Counsel raises the following issue on cross- appeal: whether there
is sufficient evidence to support the Judge’s finding under SOR subparagraph 1.(d).2  Consistent
with the following, we affirm the Judge’s adverse decision.3
The Judge made the following findings: In 2005, while employed by Company A, Applicant
developed an application for his government client to better manage their workforce.  The client
decided to go in another direction and the human resources (HR) application was never fully
developed.  Applicant kept the HR application because it contained coding he had written that he
believed could potentially be useful on future projects.  He did not get Company A or the
government client’s permission to keep the HR application.  Applicant testified that others in the
information technology (IT) field routinely keep code they develop for use on future projects and
share it with other developers without first getting approval from their employer or the government. 
Applicant’s current supervisor, who has worked in the government IT field for about 30 years,
testified that Applicant’s conduct in downloading software without permission and retaining the HR
application without first getting approval would be considered a minor infraction, at best.
In 2006, Applicant left Company A because his employer was no longer able to pay him a
six-figure salary.  The company had submitted a low offer to successfully fend off a competitor’s
bid for the government contract Applicant was working on.  After Company A succeeded in
retaining the contract, Applicant’s salary was reduced by nearly half.  Applicant left Company A
1That allegation reads, “During an interview conducted by an Other Government Agency on February 12, 2007,
you stated that after you left employment with a U.S. Government contractor in 2006, you took a copy of the database
structure/applications you developed which contained Personally Identifiable Information (PII), uploaded a version of
the database to the NIPRNET, which was later deleted, and may have maintained a copy of that database on a CD ROM
at your home.”
2SOR allegation 1.(d) initially alleged that Applicant falsified a security clearance application on June 15, 2012
by failing to reveal that he had been terminated from his employment in June 2006.  The amended SOR allegation 1.(d)
alleged that Applicant falsified a security clearance application on June 15, 2012 by failing to reveal that he had left the
employment of Company A in June 2006 by mutual agreement with the company following charges or allegations of
misconduct.
3The Judge’s resolution of the allegations in subparagraphs 1.(b) and 1(c) of the SOR is not at issue on appeal.
2
after someone else was selected for the lead project position and after he received a six-figure salary
offer from Company B.  
Applicant listed his employment with Company A on his current security clearance
application (SCA).  He reported that his reason for leaving was a better offer and better pay.  
Company A’s vice president and Applicant’s former supervisor corroborate Applicant’s version of
events leading to his resignation from Company A.  Applicant’s last performance appraisal from
Company A reflects that he consistently exceeded expectations in all areas.  The appraisal
specifically notes that the government customer rated Applicant and his team as being “truly
outstanding.”  The appraisal further stated that the government customer was looking for an
expanded role for Company A due to Applicant’s performance and leadership.
In 2007, Applicant’s application for access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI)
was denied by another government agency (AGA) due to his personal conduct and misuse of IT
systems.  The AGA found, in part, that while employed by Company A, Applicant downloaded
software without permission and kept the HR application without approval.  Additionally, the AGA
noted that during interviews with government agents, Applicant stated that the HR application
contained the personally identifiable information (PII) of the government client’s workforce. 
Following these interviews, Applicant deleted all copies of the HR application, including one that
was saved on his Company B work computer.  Also, after the interviews, Applicant contacted his
former client to seek permission to keep the HR application.  Applicant was eventually informed by
his former client that Company A did not give permission for his possession of the application.  
When answering his SCA in 2012, regarding the HR application from Company A,
Applicant wrote that the HR application “may have contained PII or it may have been test data.” 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the HR application only contained “dummy” or test data, not
PII.  
When working for his current employer, Applicant has successfully completed and routinely
receives refresher training on the proper handling and safeguarding of sensitive information,
including PII.  He is highly regarded by his current and former supervisors, co-workers, and
neighbors.  He has not been involved in any misuse of IT systems beyond those matters that led to
the denial of SCI access in 2007.  
 
The Judge concluded: Applicant refuted the falsification allegation in the SOR.  He was not
fired from Company A, nor did he leave under unfavorable circumstances.  Instead, the record
evidence established that Applicant left Company A for the reason he listed on his SCA, to wit:
“better offer, better pay.”
The Judge further concluded:  Applicant’s questionable judgment in downloading software
and retaining the HR application without his former employer’s approval raises the personal conduct
security concern.  Applicant submitted evidence that would tend to indicate reform and
rehabilitation, to include the passage of time without a repeat of the underlying conduct at issue. 
Such favorable evidence would generally mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
However, Applicant’s testimony was in direct conflict with the statements he previously made to
3
government investigators and during the current security clearance investigation as to whether the
HR application contained PII.  His inconsistency on such a material point undercuts the favorable
evidence of rehabilitation and reform, and raises continuing concerns about his reliability and
trustworthiness.  Doubts persist about Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified
information.     
SOR subparagraph 1.(a).
Applicant argues that there was insufficient evidence to support the Judge’s adverse finding
under SOR subparagraph 1.(a), and that he erroneously concluded that Guideline E, ¶ 16(c)4 and ¶
16(f)5 apply to the case.  The Board disagrees.
The record evidence indicates that when Applicant left Company A, he took with him an HR
database that he had created for the government client when he went to Company B.  There is no
evidence that Applicant had permission to take the database.  Notwithstanding Applicant’s assertion
that there was no evidence indicating that his conduct was proscribed by his employer, there is
evidence indicating that Applicant’s actions were improper and formed a sufficient basis to raise the
issue of questionable judgment on his part.  Following the initial interview with AGA investigators,
Applicant began to question whether he had permission to retain the HR database, and then he
deleted it from his Company B computer.  He then contacted a representative of the government
agency to determine whether he had permission to retain the database.  This conduct is evidence that
he knew he had engaged in some impropriety regarding the HR database.  Also, there is some
evidence in the record indicating that Applicant’s conduct was proscribed by his employer, although
the evidence does not reveal a rule violation that speaks directly to Applicant’s specific conduct .6 
Even without evidence of a specific  rule, regulation, or agreement that Applicant violated, there is
sufficient evidence to establish misconduct.  It is unnecessary to establish a specific rule violation
when an Applicant’s conduct clearly raises security concerns.  See, ISCR Case No. 11-05079 at 3
(App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2012).             
4“[C]redible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness ro comply with rules
and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information[.]”
5“[V]iolation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer as a condition of
employment.”
6An e-mail sent to Applicant from the government representative responded to Applicant’s inquiries about the
propriety of keeping the HR database he developed at Company A.  The e-mail contained a section from a Company A
manual which identified processes, methods, and tools developed or created by Company A employees as the sole
property of Company A and the government client.  (Gov. Exhibit 3).    
4
Applicant’s various statements regarding the contents of the HR database constitute another
aspect of the government’s case.  Applicant asserts that his statements were not inconsistent on the
issue of whether the HR database contained PII, and any perceived variance was a result of mistake
or his attempts to respond with complete candor to questions posed by AGA investigators.  The
evidence reveals that Applicant’s statements about the existence of PII on the HR database range
from a representation that the HR database contained the PII of up to 13,000 military members to
statements that he did not know whether or not the database contained PII to testimony at the hearing
that the database absolutely did not contain PII.7  The Judge found Applicant not credible on the
issue of the contents of the database and his knowledge thereof, which he reasonably concluded
were material points in the case, and determined that the lack of candor raised continuing concerns
about Applicants reliability and trustworthiness.  He concluded that these concerns undercut any
mitigating evidence of reform and rehabilitation, notwithstanding the passage of time since the
incident. The Judge’s credibility determination is entitled to deference on appeal.  Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1.  The Judge’s conclusions regarding the lack of mitigation are reasonable and are
supported by the record.    
SOR subparagraph 1.(d).   
Department Counsel challenges the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant did not falsify a
security clearance application question that was potentially applicable to the circumstances of
Applicant’s departure from Company A.  Department Counsel argues that those circumstances
required Applicant to reveal that he left Company A by mutual agreement following charges or
allegations of misconduct, instead of answering “no” to the question, thereby denying leaving as a
result of any unfavorable circumstances.  After a review of the record evidence and the Judge’s
decision, the Board finds that the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant did not falsify his SCA is
sustainable.  On the issue of whether Applicant should have revealed the circumstances of his
departure from Company A, the evidence cuts both ways. 
Department Counsel principally relies on two sentences from what appears to be a summary
of a report of investigation (ROI) produced by AGA (Govt. Ex. 3).  That language reads, “. . the. .
. . . representative requested that subject be removed from the contract based on the allegations that
Subject was not responsive and was conducting personal business during billable time.  Based on
the request and to maintain the contract, SUBJECT was dismissed on 5/26/2006 with his pay ending
on 06/22/2006.”  Department Counsel also relies on evidence of a conversation between Applicant
and his superiors wherein Applicant asked, “So, am I fired today or simply on the bench and fired
in four weeks if [Company A] cannot find me something?”  In reply, his supervisor stated, “you are
not fired today, consider yourself on the bench for the next four weeks.  If we cannot place you in
four weeks, we will have to lay you off.” (Govt. Ex. 2).  When arguing that this evidence required
the Judge to make a finding against Applicant on the falsification issue, Department Counsel states
7Applicant insists that the inconsistencies are the result of aggressive and intimidating interviewing techniques
that he experienced at the hands of AGA investigators.  However, as the Judge points out, in a non-coercive environment
(his completion of his SCA) five years after the AGA interviews, he stated that the database might have contained PII,
a statement that is directly at odds with his hearing testimony. 
5
that Company A’s leadership “may have chosen the path of least resistence” by speaking favorably
of Applicant or they may have had positive feelings for him.  Department Counsel also asserts that
the derogatory ROI summary language that she relies on was adopted as true by Applicant.
Applicant points to the following countervailing evidence, much of which was relied on by
the Judge: (1) the AGA ROI does not contain information about the source of the two sentence
statement relied on by Department Counsel; (2) the AGA did not list the purported adverse
employment information as a basis for their clearance denial; (3) numerous descriptions from
Company A personnel, including a vice president and a supervisor described Applicant as an
excellent employee, and their interview statements corroborate Applicant’s version of events,
namely that his salary had been cut in half when the contract he was working on was renegotiated,
and, at about the same time, he accepted an offer from another company for better pay.  These facts
were also corroborated by contemporaneous e-mails found in the record; (4) Applicant’s last
performance appraisal from Company A, which reflected outstanding performance; (5) evidence
suggesting that the persons who removed Applicant from the contract had a motive to provide false
derogatory information about him; and (6) statements by Company A personnel that Applicant’s
removal from the contract in question was unfair.
In reviewing the record evidence, the Board notes the following: (1) the language contained
in the two sentences in the AGA ROI summary relied upon by Department Counsel does  not appear
anywhere else in the record, including the main body of the AGA ROI; (2) when describing the
circumstances of Applicant’s final days at Company A, Applicant’s supervisor gave no indication
that Applicant was removed from the contract for misconduct, and he questioned the motives of the
contract personnel who made the removal decision.  The supervisor also stated that comments of the
government contracting officers should not be regarded as official Company A comments regarding
Applicant’s work history (Govt. Ex. 3); (3) Applicant’s salary reduction was the result of vagaries
in the contract termination and re-awarding process and had nothing to do with his performance; and
(4) after he was made aware of Applicant’s removal from the contract, a Company A manager
expressed his wish that the company could continue Applicant’s long term goals with them.  
(Hearing Exhibit 4).  
The Board also notes Department Counsel’s claim that Applicant affirmatively
acknowledged as true the portion of the AGA ROI summary that contains the derogatory two
sentence language.  This claim is without merit.  The record contains no such acknowledgment.8 
Similarly, Department Counsel’s claim that the two sentences were an admission by Applicant is
without merit.  It is impossible on this record to determine the source of the information in the two
8Department Counsel may be conflating Government Exhibits 2 and 3.  Government Exhibit 2 was an Interview
Verification Interrogatory wherein Applicant was asked to verify the accuracy of an ROI prepared by an investigative
body other than the AGA.  He did so.  However, the derogatory two sentence language found in Government Exhibit
3 is not found in Government Exhibit 2.  Government Exhibit 3 is styled, “Interrogatories” but it contains only a request
that Applicant supply written documents to the investigating agency.  He did so.  The acknowledgment Applicant then
made in Government Exhibit 3 went only to his answer to the question, “Have you provided the requested
documentation?” His affirmation did not go to the truthfulness or accuracy of any of the contents of Government Exhibit
3.  
6
sentences upon which she relies.  Also, Department Counsel’s suggestion that Company A’s
management was taking “the path of least resistance” when speaking favorably of Applicant or was
acting as a result of positive feelings toward him is without a basis in the case record and is
speculative.  
With this evidentiary record as background, the Board concludes that the Judge did not err
by finding in Applicant’s favor on SOR subparagraph 1(d).  On these facts, it was not arbitrary or
capricious for the Judge to discount the assertion that Applicant left his employment with Company
A by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct.  The falsification issue was
controverted, and as such, Department Counsel bore the burden of proof to establish the underlying
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  Here, Department Counsel developed some evidence in support of the
allegation, but there was also significant evidence that detracted from the allegation.  Determining
the weight and credibility of the evidence is the special province of the trier of fact.  See ISCR Case
No. 02-02892 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 28, 2004).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Department Counsel is essentially arguing for a different interpretation of the record evidence.     
               
Government Exhibit 3
Applicant objects to the Judge’s admission of a portion Government Exhibit 3, the ROI from
the AGA.  He essentially alleges lack of reliability and lack of completeness.  Applicant cites several
perceived irregularities, such as the fact that the reasons for the many redactions are not given in the
exhibit’s documents, there are no representations that the ROI is a true copy, there is no statement
that the documents contained therein were produced in the regular course of business, and the ROI
is dated seven months after the interview sessions.  Applicant also asserts that the document is
incomplete.  His theory is that changes were made to the document after he requested it, and the
document “bears every indication of having been generated in anticipation of litigation.”  The Board
concludes that the document was admissible. 
Federal agencies and their employees are entitled to a presumption of good faith and
regularity in the performance of their responsibilities.  See ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jun. 25, 2009).  Applicant’s blanket assertions that the document may have been altered or was not
prepared in the ordinary course of business do not overcome this presumption.  The items that
Applicant enumerates as missing from the ROI, while of some benefit in conclusively establishing
reliability, are not prerequisites to admissibility.  Applicant has made no assertion and provided no
evidence that would enable the Board to determine whether or not the document is incomplete.
The Board notes that the document in question was actually supplied by Applicant in
response to a request by the government.  Also, as Department Counsel points out, the AGA ROI
in Government Exhibit 3 essentially speaks to the allegation in subparagraph 1.(d). of the SOR,
7
which was adjudicated in Applicant’s favor.  Thus, even assuming that the AGA ROI was
improperly admitted, any resulting error would be harmless.
Due Process
Applicant argues that the amending of SOR allegation in subparagraph 1.(d). deprived him
of procedural due process as did Department Counsel’s pursuit of a case against him under
subparagraph 1.(d).  The latter assertion appears to be predicated on Applicant’s belief that there was
no evidence on which to base the allegation.  Applicant’s claims lack merit.
A Judge’s decision whether or not to allow an SOR amendment is reviewed for an abuse of
discretion.  The Board concludes that the Judge’s decision to allow the amendment, which took
place pre-hearing, was sustainable.  Again, the SOR subparagraph that was amended was resolved
in Applicant’s favor.  Applicant’s claim that Department Counsel brought forth a frivolous case
under subparagraph 1.(d) is undercut by the fact that there was some evidence tending to establish
the allegation.  Given the existence of some evidence to support the allegation, Department Counsel
cannot reasonably be accused of proceeding in bad faith.  
Conclusion
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
8
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
9
