 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01724 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the drug involvement or the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, H, and E. 
DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 21, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
 
2 
 
 
Relevant Material (FORM) on March 17, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
he was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a written response to the FORM dated May 29, 
2015, which was admitted into evidence without objection as Item 6. The Government’s 
evidence (Items 1-5) was also admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on June 17, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is divorced and has two children (including one 
step-child whose status since the divorce is unknown). He has worked for his current 
employer, a defense contractor, since December 2013. He received a certificate from a 
technical training school in May 1995. He was unemployed from October 2013 to 
December 2013.1  
  
 The SOR lists 24 delinquent debts and a prior Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The debts 
include 21 medical debts totaling approximately $20,807 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.h and 1.j – 
1.w); one utility debt in the amount of $218 (SOR ¶ 1.i); one telecommunication debt in 
the amount of about $239 (SOR ¶ 1.x); and one consumer debt in the amount of $589 
(SOR ¶ 1.y). These debts are supported by credit reports from December 2013 and 
February 2015.2  
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR concerning Guideline H includes 
using marijuana in 1990 and again in February 2013 (SOR ¶ 3.a). The personal conduct 
allegations include intentionally failing to provide correct information while completing 
his security clearance application in December 2013 concerning his past use of 
marijuana in the last seven years (SOR ¶ 2.a) and whether he had any collection debts 
in the past seven years (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that all but five of his medical debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.m, and 1.o – 1.r) were paid as a result of receiving a workman’s 
compensation claim. A letter from his attorney indicated that he was pursuing such a 
claim and Applicant submitted a recent credit report showing that the medical debts 
were no longer listed. He stated that SOR ¶ 1.m will be covered by the workman’s 
compensation payout and that he will pay the three small debts that are family-related 
medical expenses. He provided documentation showing that the three non-medical 
                                                          
1 Items 1-3. 
 
2 Items 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
debts were all paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.x, and 1.y). He also received financial counseling 
during his 2007 Chapter 7 bankruptcy.3 
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) in October 2013. At 
that time, he failed to disclose his marijuana use and his delinquent debts when 
specifically asked to provide that information. In December 2013, he was interviewed by 
an investigator. He disclosed that he used marijuana in February of 2013 when he was 
helping a friend move. After the move, they socialized by drinking alcohol and smoking 
a marijuana cigarette produced by a friend of the person who was moving. Applicant 
smoked from the marijuana cigarette. He immediately felt the effects of smoking the 
marijuana. He knew using marijuana was wrong, but used it because of peer pressure. 
He also admitted to using marijuana one time in 1990. He was at a friend’s house and 
the friend produced a marijuana cigarette. He used the marijuana because of peer 
pressure. He claimed that he does not intend to use marijuana in the future. He also 
claims that he failed to list the 2013 marijuana use on his SCA because he did not 
understand the question. The question he claimed not to understand is the following: “In 
the last seven years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled substances.” He 
also disclosed the full extent of his financial situation to the investigator. He also used 
the lack of understanding explanation as the reason he failed to list his financial 
delinquencies on his SCA.4 
 
 Applicant provided two character letters, one from a supervisor and one from a 
neighbor. The supervisor described Applicant as “reliable and trustworthy.” The 
neighbor stated that Applicant’s work with the neighborhood association has been 
beneficial and appreciated.5   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
3 Items 1 (p. 12-17), 6. 
 
4 Items 1-3. 
 
5 Item 1 (p. 18-19). 
 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also has a 
prior Chapter 7 bankruptcy. I find both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 The bulk of Applicant’s debts were medically related and as a result of his 
successful workman’s compensation claim, he was able to pay all but two of the 
medical debts. Those balances are relatively small and he plans to pay them in the near 
future. He paid all the non-medical debts as well. He provided sufficient evidence to 
show that the majority of debts were related to his workman’s compensation claim that 
is being resolved. His debts are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s financial problems are 
being resolved or under control. I find mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(d) apply.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
 Appellant illegally used marijuana in 1990 and again in February 2013. I find that 
the above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
 Applicant’s admitted drug use of marijuana happened as recently as 2013, a few 
months before he completed his SCA and in 1990. Although two uses over 23 years is 
infrequent, the similar pattern of his use is troubling and cause for concern. In both 
instances, he was with friends and succumbed to “peer pressure” which resulted in him 
using marijuana. At the mature age of 42, he knew it was wrong, but did it anyway. 
These circumstances lead me to conclude that his actions cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and especially his judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. The 
evidence does not support that Applicant demonstrated his intent not to abuse drugs in 
the future. His 2013 use is recent and although he stated he does not intend to use in 
the future, he did not commit that intent to writing with automatic revocation of his 
clearance for any future violation. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
Applicant failed to list material information about his past marijuana use and his 
delinquent collection accounts on his SCA completed in December 2013. His 
explanation for not providing the information was that he did not understand the 
questions. I find this explanation unpersuasive. The questions are straight forward and 
not complicated. The reasonable inference to draw, based upon the evidence, is that 
Applicant deliberately withheld the information to seek an advantage in gaining a 
security clearance because he was concerned that revealing this derogatory information 
would minimize his chances for a clearance. His most recent marijuana use occurred 
only months before he completed his SCA. He deliberately failed to list his prior 
marijuana use and his financial collection account information on his security clearance 
application in 2013. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s 
falsifications. Falsifying information on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense and doing so casts doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s character 
references. He mitigated his financial concerns. However, he engaged in recent drug 
use and intentionally provided false information on his SCA. Therefore, he failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, but did not mitigate the concerns for Guideline H, drug involvement and 
Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
