KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge was unbiased. We give
deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations.  Inconsistent statements can undermine an
applicant’s credibility.  The Judge’s finding that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his
drug use was supported by substantial evidence.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding
precedent.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-02696.a1
DATE: 07/01/2015
DATE: July 1, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02696
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 19, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 27, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him,
whether the Judge’s findings of fact contained errors; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He has held a security clearance since 2005. 
Applicant used marijuana on several occasions in March and April 2011.  He did so while attending
engagement parties prior to his wedding.  He stated that the social occasions left him vulnerable to
peer pressure.  Twice in February 2015 he submitted to drug screening tests, which came back
negative.  He has signed a letter of intent not to use drugs again, with automatic revocation of his
clearance should he fail to honor the terms of the letter.
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in March 2013, in which he did
not disclose his 2011 drug use.  He did not disclose it during the subsequent clearance interview. 
He submitted another SCA in early 2014 to another Government agency, in which he disclosed his
drug use.  Applicant denied intentionally omitting this information during 2013.  He stated that he
had filled out the form using an older copy and, in haste to complete it, failed to pay sufficient
attention to detail.  He stated that he disclosed the misconduct in the later SCA because he
completed it by hand.
Applicant’s admission in the 2014 SCA that he has used drugs at a time when he held a
security clearance prompted the filing of an incident report.  After this report was filed, Applicant
was questioned by the security office.  He stated to an official in this office that he had omitted the
drug use because he had just become a father and could not sleep.  “The reasons that Applicant has
given for omitting the drug use in 2011 have changed several times.”  Decision at 3.  The Judge also
found that Applicant had not been candid when he claimed that he had sent a corrected version of
the SCA to his facility security officer (FSO).  The incident report stated that the FSO noticed the
discrepancy between the 2013 and 2014 SCAs and then spoke to Applicant.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for ethics and professionalism.  His witnesses believe that
he is worthy of a clearance.  One witness testified that Applicant had told him that, once he
discovered the error in the 2013 SCA, “‘he went back into the system and fixed’” it.  Id. at 4.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s letter of intent and his claim to have used drugs due to peer
pressure.  She concluded, however, that the Guideline H allegations raised questions about his
judgment that he failed to mitigate.  Regarding the allegations of falsification under Guideline E,
the Judge stated that Applicant had given differing explanations for his misconduct.  She concluded
that Applicant was not credible.  She found that he had not made a prompt, good-faith effort to
correct the error.  Moreover, she found the omissions were recent and serious.  She concluded that
Applicant had not mitigated these concerns. 
2
 In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s good work record, his letter of
intent not to use drugs in the future, and his having held a clearance since 2005.  Contrary to
Applicant’s claims that he had attempted to correct his omission, the Judge stated that the
information came to light by means of the 2014 SCA, which was submitted to an agency other than
DoD.  She concluded that Applicant had not shown good judgment or honesty.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not decide his case on the evidence but, rather, on the
basis of her prejudices.  A Judge is presumed to be unbiased, and an applicant claiming otherwise
has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-07751 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2015). 
We have examined the Judge’s decision along with the entire record, including the transcript of the
hearing, and find nothing therein that would prompt a reasonable person to concluded that the Judge
lacked the requisite impartiality.  Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion on this issue.
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s conclusion that he lacked credibility.  He denies that
he made inconsistent statements about the reason for his omission of his drug use.  We give
deference to Judges’ credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  The record contains
evidence that Applicant claimed that his omission was due to his having hastily completed the 2013
SCA from an older copy.  It also contains evidence that he attributed it to his having been tired. 
These explanations are not totally consistent with one another, and a reasonable person could find
in them a basis for concluding that Applicant had not been candid about his security significant
conduct. 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings of fact, including her finding that his omission of
his drug use was deliberate.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by
substantial record evidence, “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate
to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1.  When examining an applicant’s mens rea, the Judge should evaluate the false statement
or omission in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03415 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul.
25, 2014).  
In this case, the Judge’s reliance on Applicant’s inconsistent statements, along with evidence
of Applicant’s prior experience with holding a clearance and completing SCAs, support the
challenged finding about Applicant’s intent.  Applicant points to an error by the Judge concerning
the year in which he submitted to a polygraph exam.  This error did not likely affect the overall
outcome of the case.  Therefore, it is harmless.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern
are supported by substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from
the evidence.
Applicant refers us to some Hearing Office cases that, he believes, support his case for a
clearance.  We give these cases due consideration.  However, Hearing Office cases are not binding
on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03223 at 2
(App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2015).  
3
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
