 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05445 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On February 5, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 4, 
2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 24, 2015. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, and she offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until July 1, 2015, 
to allow Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents, which she did. One 
document was received, marked as AE C, and admitted into evidence without 
objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, 1.i through 1.l, 1.p, 
1.r, and 1.u. She denied the remaining allegations. I have incorporated her admissions 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. She completed one year of college. She married in 
2003 and separated from her husband in November 2013. She has a 23-year-old son. 
Applicant worked for the same employer from June 2006 to February 2013. She was 
unemployed for one month, and then worked at a temporary agency from March 2013 
until she started working for her present employer, a federal contractor, in August 
2014.2  
 
The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling approximately $29,465. The debts 
are supported by credit reports from March 2013 and October 2014.3 
 
Applicant and her husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2008 and had 
approximately $59,340 of debt discharged in 2009. She attributed their financial 
problems to her husband being laid off from his job after 23 years.4  
 
Applicant acknowledged her recent financial problems, and she attributed them 
to her husband deciding he did not want to work any longer, so he quit his job and failed 
to contribute to the family expenses. Applicant became responsible for their debts. 
Since they separated he has not made payments toward their debts. She contacted a 
divorce attorney in March 2015 and is making $150 installment payments to the 
attorney. She has about $600 left to pay and then she can file for divorce. She believes 
her husband is going to dispute all of the marital debts because he cannot afford to pay 
any of them.5  
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 17-22, 50. 
 
3 GE 2 and 4. 
 
4 Tr. 22-23, 29-30, 52; GE 5. 
 
5 Tr. 23-24, 30-31, 39-44, 49. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in April 2015. It was dismissed 
because she only completed one part of the two-part credit counseling requirement. 
She intended to complete the second part and file again. She provided a document, 
dated June 25, 2015, showing she made a payment of $310 to her bankruptcy attorney 
for “Chapter 13 filing fees.” There is a zero balance owed. Applicant indicated her 
intention is to include all of the SOR debts in the bankruptcy. She stated she estimated 
that the Chapter 13 payments should be $167 biweekly.6 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($8,443) is for a loan Applicant cosigned for her son to 
purchase a car. Applicant stated her son was going to make $260 monthly payments on 
the debt. She did not provide documents to show he is making payments. The debt is 
unresolved.7 
 
Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($806) and 1.e ($806) and indicated 
in her answer to the SOR that she was making $80 and $86 payments respectively. At 
her hearing, she stated she made a couple payments, but could not afford to continue 
the payments. No proof was provided regarding the payments she indicated she made.8 
 
Applicant indicated that she paid and resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($234), 1.j 
($234), 1.k ($172), and 1.l ($111) with her 2013 income tax refund. She was given an 
opportunity to provide supporting documents to show the debts were paid. She did not 
provide documents to show she resolved these debts.  
 
Applicant stated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.m ($66) and 1.q ($677) are to the 
same creditor. She stated that she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m, and her husband took 
over payment of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.q. She did not provide supporting documents to 
show the debts are paid or being paid. She disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.t ($583) 
because she does not recognize the creditor. She did not provide information as to what 
action she has taken to dispute it. None of the remaining alleged debts are resolved.9  
 
Applicant moved in with her mother after she separated from her husband, and 
they share the rent. She returned her 2012 model car that she had purchased in 2013 to 
the dealer because she could not afford the loan payments (SOR ¶ 1.a; $11,006). She 
drives her mother’s car. She does not have any credit cards and is working 10-15 hours 
a week at a part-time job in addition to her full-time job. She provides $100 a month in 
financial support for her grandchild. She has no savings.10 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 23-24, 28-29, 44-46, 55; GE 6; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. 32-33. 
 
8 Tr. 38-39. 
 
9 Tr. 25-28, 33-35, 55-57. 
 
10 Tr. 32, 35, 52-54. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided a character letter from her part-time employer that described 
her as a professional and trustworthy person who abided by the rules. Applicant also 
provided a partial performance evaluation that noted she did an above average job and 
volunteered to do extra work as needed when other employees were absent or the 
volume of work was high.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
11 AE A and B. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.12 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling approximately $29,465. Sufficient 
evidence supports the validity of the debts. In addition, Applicant and her husband had 
approximately $59,000 in delinquent debts discharged through bankruptcy in 2009. I 
find the evidence raises the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case no. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s numerous debts remain unresolved and therefore are recent. Based 
on her financial history, insufficient evidence was provided to conclude the debts were 
incurred under unique circumstances and are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant’s attributes her financial problems to her husband failing to contribute to 
the marital debts. This is a condition beyond Applicant’s control. In order for the 
complete application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant intends to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. This may eventually 
resolve her delinquent debts, but at this juncture she has not completed the filing or 
started making payments. She has been separated from her husband since November 
2013. Some of the debts in the SOR are for small amounts. Despite sharing rent with 
her mother and working two jobs, she has not shown that she paid any of the small 
debts. She has not provided supporting documentation for the debts she stated she 
paid. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant indicated she completed one part of the required financial counseling 
for filing bankruptcy. She intended to complete the second part. She has paid her 
attorney the bankruptcy filing fee. She does not have an approved payment plan. This 
would be her second bankruptcy in seven years. She does not have an established 
track record of being financially responsible. At this juncture, there are not clear 
indications her financial problems are being resolved or under control. She did not 
 
7 
 
 
present evidence that she initiated good-faith efforts to repay her creditors or otherwise 
resolve her debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Applicant has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of her 
disputes regarding certain debts or evidence of actions she has taken to resolve the 
issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old. She attributed her latest financial problems to her 
husband refusing to help pay their joint debts. Applicant and her husband had $59,000 
of delinquent debt discharged in bankruptcy in 2009. They now have 20 delinquent 
debts that remain unresolved. She intends to file for divorce. She has not provided proof 
that she has paid any of the delinquent debts. She does not have a track record for 
being fiscally responsible. She intends to resolve her financial problems again through 
bankruptcy. At this juncture, Applicant’s financial problems remain a security concern. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
