 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                          )  ISCR Case No. 14-06554 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 18, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Based on a review of Applicant’s e-QIP and the 
ensuing investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 26, 2015, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under Guidelines F and E.  
 
On February 17, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 26, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 4. On April 29, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections or supply additional 
information. He did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on June 19, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his federal and 
state income tax returns for 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he had seven delinquent debts 
totaling about $8,086 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.h). SOR ¶ 1.a was cross-alleged as the sole 
Guideline E allegation (SOR ¶ 2.a). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each 
allegation with the exception of the $314 debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for that contractor since May 2014. He has not served in the military. He 
attended college for about six years, but has not yet received a degree. He is married 
and has three children, ages 7, 16, and 17, and a stepchild, age 25. He is seeking a 
security clearance for the first time.2 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a – failure to file federal and state income tax returns for 2008.  
In his e-QIP, Applicant reported continuous employment in various jobs since 
September 2000. He indicated that he failed to file his 2008 federal and state income 
tax returns before the deadline and continued delaying the filing of those returns. He 
planned to file those returns the following year, but forgot to do so. Since then, he had 
not thought about filing those returns until he was required to submit his e-QIP in April 
2014. The record contains no evidence that he has filed those returns.3 
 
The IRS advises taxpayers that “Regardless of your reason for not filing a 
required return, file your tax return as soon as possible.” Penalties may be imposed for 
failing to file a tax return as required or failing to pay taxes as required. “[T]he statute of 
limitations for the IRS to assess and collect any outstanding balances does not start 
until a return has been filed. In other words, there is no statute of limitations for 
assessing and collecting tax if no return has been filed.”4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
 
2 Items 2, 3.  
 
3 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
4 See http://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc153.html and http://www.irs.gov/uac/Failure-to-File-or-Pay-
Penalties:-Eight-Facts.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b-1.c and 1.e-1.h – six collection accounts totaling $1,751. These 
consist of four medical accounts, a cable television account, and a telecommunications 
account. Two of the medical bills were incurred when an ambulance took him to an 
emergency room because he was experiencing chest pains. He provided no 
documentation showing that any of these debts were being paid or otherwise resolved. 
He denied the cable television account (SOR ¶ 1.g), claiming he never had an account 
with the listed company. He provided no documentation that he has disputed the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.g.5  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $6,335. This debt is for a motor scooter. In his 
e-QIP, Applicant stated that he could not afford to purchase this item, but he did so 
against his wife’s wishes. He indicated that he could not make the first payment, and the 
scooter was eventually repossessed. He also stated that he had not attempted to satisfy 
this debt because he could not afford to make the payments.6 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that he received financial counseling. He did not 
provide a monthly budget. It is unknown whether he has any discretionary income 
remaining each month after payment of his expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
                                                          
5 Items 1, 2, 3, 4.  
6 Items 1, 2, 3, 4.  
 
4 
 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
Applicant admissions and the record evidence established three disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required . . . . 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant still has not filed his 
2008 federal and state income tax returns. His delinquent debts are ongoing. The 
medical expenses were incurred due to conditions beyond his control, but he provided 
no evidence showing that he has acted responsibly in addressing those debts. 
Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude his financial problems are unlikely to 
 
6 
 
 
recur. No evidence was presented that he received financial counseling. He provided no 
documentation showing he has a legitimate basis for disputing any debts. His financial 
problems continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2008 federal and state income tax returns as required. 
Such a failure reflects an unwillingness to comply with rules and may affect his 
personal, professional, or community standing. Both of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
Two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
7 
 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
For the reasons discussed under Guideline F above, I find that none of the 
Guideline E mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s failure to file his 2008 federal and 
state income tax returns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.7 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. His handling of his financial problems leaves me with doubts as 
to his current eligibility to access classified information. Following the Egan decision and 
the “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national 
security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant  
 
     Subparagraph 2.a:            Against Applicant 
     
 
                                                          
7 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
