 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-03788   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 23, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts totaling $45,913. The debts were 
incurred due to a contentious divorce and business failure. Applicant has acted 
responsibly, given the circumstances, by utilizing the services of a debt management 
company. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 28, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On September 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on September 25, 2014. (Item 3.) He 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing in an email dated May 22, 2015. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on April 10, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was received by Applicant on May 2, 2015. 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. He provided 
additional information in response to the FORM within the 30-day period, marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel had no objections to AE A, and it was 
admitted into the record. DOHA assigned the case to me on June 4, 2015. Applicant 
submitted a written request to provide additional documentation and the record was 
reopened until close of business on July 1, 2015. Applicant presented nine additional 
pages of documentation, marked AE B. Department Counsel had no objections to AE B, 
and it was admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
since 1998. He has held a security clearance for 17 years. He married in 1985 and 
divorced in 2014. He identified ten children on his e-QIP, two of whom are minors. 
(Answer; Item 4.) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant owes approximately $45,913 in delinquent debt on 
five delinquent credit cards and past-due child support obligations. In his Answer, 
Applicant admitted all of the credit card debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. He denied the 
past-due child support obligation in SOR ¶ 1.f. (Item 2.) His debts are documented in 
the record credit report dated February 2014. (Item 5.) After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant’s debts were caused by his marital separation, which began in 2010; 
the subsequent divorce from his ex-wife; and the failure of the family-owned business 
that his ex-wife was managing at the time of their separation. Applicant worked full time 
and his ex-wife ran the family business. She failed to pay the business’ bills. Applicant 
used his personal credit cards to sustain the business’s debts until he sold the business 
in 2012. He used the proceeds of the sale to pay off some of the business debt. 
Applicant’s marital assets were frozen during the divorce proceedings and he was 
unable to address the debts until after the divorce was finalized by a court in August 
2014. (Item 3; Item 6; AE A.) 
 
 In September 2014 Applicant enrolled in a debt settlement company (DSC). DSC 
helped him create a budget, set up a payment plan into an escrow account, and actively 
engaged his creditors in negotiations to permit repayment of the five credit card debts. It 
also provided him with educational resources, which he has utilized, to learn to get out 
of debt and financially recover from his divorce. Applicant calls the DSC twice a month 
regarding the status of his accounts. He makes payments of “$351.50 each payday by 
 
 
3 
 
 
automatic transfer” into the escrow account. He receives 26 paychecks per year. He 
has successfully made payments for more than seven months. The balance of the 
escrow account as of May 2015 was $5,322.59. (Item 3; Item 6; AE A; AE B.) 
 
 Of the five credit card debts alleged, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e debts of $17,814 and 
$4,431 respectively, have been forgiven by the creditor and are resolved. These debts 
were owed to the same creditor. He listed these delinquent accounts with DSC. After he 
received two 1099-Cs in 2014, which resolved the indebtedness, the debts were 
removed from the DSC program. Applicant reported the 1099-Cs on his 2014 Federal 
Income Tax return. (Item 3; AE A.) 
 
 On June 23, 2015, DSC notified Applicant it had negotiated a settlement 
agreement with the creditor that held both the $10,685.53 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
and the $4,827 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. The creditor agreed to accept $5,880 to 
resolve SOR ¶ 1.b and $2,656 to resolve SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant accepted the settlement 
agreements. The money will be remitted to this creditor through payments directly from 
the escrow account over the next eight months. These debts are being resolved. (Item 
3; AE B.) 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent credit card debt owed to the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 
1.c in the amount of $7,755.51, is currently unresolved. However, DSC is in “active 
negotiation” with this creditor of behalf of Applicant to seek a resolution. Applicant 
intends to work with DSC until it is “retired.” (Item 3; AE A; AE B.) 
 
 Applicant denied having a $400 delinquent child support obligation, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f. He presented a statement from the child support service division of his state 
that showed his account was current as of August 2014 and reflects a balance due of 
$0. This debt is resolved. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant has no new credit accounts. He has a monthly surplus of $933.70. He 
is committed to resolving all of his delinquencies. (Item 3; Item 7; AE A.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Since 2010, Applicant accumulated $45,913 in delinquent debt that he was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises security concerns under both 
conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following provide 
mitigation: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies were caused by both his marital separation 
and resulting divorce, and by the failure of his family-owned business operated by his 
ex-wife. Those were circumstances beyond his control and are unlikely to recur. He no 
longer owns the business. He does not live beyond his means, and earns a sufficient 
income, which should enable him to avoid future delinquencies. He immediately enlisted 
the help of DSC to repay his delinquencies after his divorce was finalized, and his 
assets were no longer frozen by the divorce proceeding.  
 
 Applicant has acted responsibly by saving money in an escrow account that will 
be used to repay his remaining debts. His child support obligation is current. While he 
resolved two business accounts through discharge by the creditor, and three other 
debts remain unpaid to date, he is acting responsibly, given the circumstances. Two of 
the three debts are business accounts that are negotiated to compromised amounts and 
he will pay them from the escrow account through DSC. The last account is in the 
 
 
6 
 
 
process of negotiation and it is likely that it will be settled, based on Applicant’s success 
rate to date on resolving his debts.  
 
 His substantial monthly remainder indicates that future debts are unlikely to 
recur. Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns with respect to his financial 
delinquencies are mitigated. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has worked for his 
employer since 1998. He has held a security clearance for 17 years. He experienced 
financial difficulties from 2010 to present, due to situations beyond his control. His 
divorce was contentious and his assets were frozen by the court from 2012 to 2014. 
 
 Once his divorce was finalized, he acted responsibly by hiring DSC to negotiate 
with his creditors. He has saved over $5,322 in an escrow account over the past seven 
months toward the repayment of his debts. He plans to continue to make payments until 
all of his delinquencies are resolved. He has utilized the financial educational resources 
offered by the DSC. He has not incurred any new debts.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
