1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-02319
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., 
Deputy Chief Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant violated the trust placed in him, as a registered nurse, to safeguard
medications containing controlled substances. He diverted those medications for his
own use because of his opiate addiction. Although Applicant claims that he has
completed drug rehabilitation and is now drug free, the nature and recency of his
conduct precludes mitigation at this time. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 21, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation,
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included four exhibits (Items 1 - 4) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.  1
On August 7, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline H (Illegal Drug Involvement)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and2
requested a decision without a hearing. On March 3, 2015, Department Counsel issued
a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the3
FORM on March 16, 2015, and was advised he had 30 days from the date of receipt to
submit additional information in response to the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the
FORM, and the case was assigned to me on June 25, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used opiates on a
frequent basis between May 2012 and April 2013 (SOR 1.a); that he used marijuana on
a frequent basis between March 2001 and April 2006 (SOR 1.b); and that his license to
work as a registered nurse was suspended in July 2013 for “suspected diversion of
medications” (SOR 1.c). Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant
resigned from two hospital jobs in May 2013 (SOR 2.a and 2.b) and another in January
2013 (SOR 2.c) for “suspected diversion of medications.” In response to the SOR,
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. In addition to his admission, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is 39 years old and works as a welder at a shipyard in support of U.S.
Navy construction and maintenance. He was hired for that job in January 2014 and he
requires a security clearance as part of his assigned duties. 
Applicant graduated from a nursing program in May 2010 and began a career as
a registered nurse (RN). In June 2008, started working full time at the hospital
referenced in SOR 2.c. In January 2013, he was fired from that job for poor
performance and because he was suspected of having taken prescription medications
from the hospital inventory for his own use. In May 2011, Applicant also started working
part-time at the hospital referenced in SOR 2.b. In February 2013, after he was fired
from the SOR 2.c hospital, Applicant found a full-time RN position at the hospital
referenced in SOR 2.a. In May 2013, he resigned from both of his RN jobs because he
was suspected of having taken prescription medications from both workplaces for his
own use. In the case of the SOR 2.a hospital, Applicant admitted to his supervisor that
he took dilaudid, a powerful morphine derivative drug in the opioid class of painkillers. In
the other two instances, Applicant was summoned by his supervisor to answer
questions about his suspected diversion of controlled substance medications, but he
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
resigned. Applicant knew he would be fired if he had not resigned first. (FORM, Items 3
and 4)
Applicant started abusing prescription painkillers in May or June of 2012. In
addition to taking medications from the hospitals where he worked, Applicant also
obtained and used vicodin and percocet without prescriptions. He had previously used
marijuana from 2001 to 2006. After he resigned from or was fired from the three hospital
jobs in 2013, his RN license was suspended. In his response to the SOR, Applicant
acknowledged he has a drug problem, and that he self-referred for outpatient treatment
for opiate addiction in February 2013. He further averred that he has been drug and
alcohol free for over two years and that he has been fully compliant with his treatment
program. Applicant did not provide any other information about his treatment or
information about a prognosis for continued recovery. He also disclosed in his EQIP
that, at the time he submitted the application for clearance, he was still engaged in
some level of treatment for his addiction. (FORM, Items 2 - 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant used marijuana from 2001 to 2006. In 2012 and 2013, he abused and
became addicted to opiate-based prescription pain medications. He lost three hospital
jobs and his RN license because he stole some of the medications he used from his
workplace. This information raises a security concern that is articulated at AG ¶ 24 as
follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
5
More specifically, the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see
above definition) applies. I have also considered that AG ¶ 25(d) (diagnosis by a duly
qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of
drug abuse or drug dependence) applies based solely on Applicant’s own statements
about his treatment for addiction. However, this is limited because this record contains
no other documentation of Applicant’s treatment, or a clinical diagnosis.
I have also weighed the possible application of the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
None of these mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant claims he has not
used illegal drugs or abused prescription drugs for two years, there is no corroborative
information regarding his treatment, his current circumstances, or any prognosis for
recovery by a qualified medical professional. Without that information, it is too soon to
assess the effectiveness of his recovery. Available information also shows that he still is
suspended from working as an RN. On balance, Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns abut his drug use. 
Personal Conduct
Applicant’s theft and misuse of prescription pain medications also raises a
security concern about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Ostensibly, as an
RN he was entrusted with safeguarding medications containing controlled substances.
Applicant betrayed that trust when he started taking some of those medications to feed
his addiction. The security concern about his personal conduct is expressed at AG ¶ 15
as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
6
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶ 16
disqualifying conditions:
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations; and (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
Applicant was entrusted with the safekeeping of, and accountability for, powerful
pain medications. His failure to live up to that trust in pursuit of his own interests and
needs fundamentally undercuts the Government’s confidence that he would be willing to
properly act in a similar capacity with respect to classified information. The fact that
Applicant lost three jobs and is barred from working in his chosen field is an indicator of
the gravity of his misconduct.
Two of the six AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions are potentially applicable here: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because Applicant’s misconduct was frequent and
was not minor. Although, Applicant has received treatment for his addiction, without
7
more information about the current state of his recovery, it is too soon to say if he will
repeat his abuse of prescription drugs. Certainly his circumstances have changed, but
only because he has lost his RN license and does not have the same access to the
medications he used. On balance, it is too soon to conclude that Appellant has
mitigated the security concerns about his trustworthiness and judgment.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and H, I have reviewed the record before me in
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). In that regard, I note
Applicant’s candid disclosure of his drug and professional problems. It is also
commendable that Applicant has received treatment for his addiction. But unless and
until he provides more information about his recovery and additional time has passed,
doubts about his suitability for access to classified information will persist. Because
protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those
doubts must be resolved against the individual. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
