 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05512 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden F. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleges she is delinquent on six collection accounts, one charged-off 
account, a judgment, and four tax liens. Her delinquent accounts total approximately 
$34,000. There is no showing of payments having been made on the debts. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 9, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons detailing security concerns. On 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
December 29, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated April 9, 2015. The FORM contained seven attachments (Items). 
On May 28, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of her 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant’s response was due June 27, 2015. No 
material was received. On July 30, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted owing all nine delinquent 
accounts listed in the SOR.2 I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old supply technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 20123 and seeks to obtain a security clearance.4 (Item 4) 
Applicant provided no information about her duty performance and provided no 
character reference letters.  
 
In 2008, a house fire destroyed Applicant’s financial records. (Item 6) In 2009, 
she was notified by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that since no federal income tax 
return had been received, returns were filed on her behalf by the IRS. (Item 6) The filing 
resulted in $7,000 being owed in federal tax. (Item 6) The IRS had filed the returns 
showing her husband’s gross income from his business as a self-employed builder and 
filed the return claiming no business deductions. (Item 6) She asserted thereafter her 
husband filed returns for those two years. 
 
In 2010, the IRS notified Applicant that an audit had been conducted on the 2007 
and 2008 returns and $10,535 (SOR1.e) was owed. (Item 6) Her bank account was 
levied on twice, first, in the amount of $1,500 and again in the amount of $800. (Item 6) 
In January 2013 and February 2013, she completed a Personal Subject Interview (PSI). 
In her PSI, she indicated she would attempt to file separately because sufficient funds 
had been withheld from her income. If that were not possible, she would make 
arrangements with the IRS to pay the tax. (Item 6) In her December 2014 SOR Answer, 
she again stated she hoped to file as “married filing separately” on her tax returns and 
hoped to do so by April 2015. (Item 3) 
 
                                                          
2 The SOR lists delinquent obligations in paragraphs 1.a to 1.k and also paragraph 1.m. It does not list a 
paragraph 1.l. (Item 1) 
 
3 In Applicant’s SOR Answer, she indicated she did not want to lose her job of 14 years. (Item 3) 
 
4 In January 2002, Applicant had clearance. (Item 6) In her January and February 2013 Personal Subject 
Interview, she states she must have had a clearance of some kind in order to work at her jobs. (Item 6)  
 
3 
In 2012, Applicant was contacted by a collection agency attempting to collect 
$4,279 (SOR 1.i). (Item 6) In her PSI, she indicted she had entered into an agreement 
to pay $200 monthly on the debt. At that time, she did not know if this delinquent 
account had been reduced to a judgment. (Item 6) During her PSI, she had no 
knowledge of: a $4,793 (SOR 1.g) tax lien; a $6,399 (SOR 1.h) tax lien; a $304 (SOR 
1.b) collection account; a $287 (SOR 1.j) medical collection account; a $1,347 (SOR 
1.k) medical collection account; or a $52 (SOR 1.m) medical account. (Item 6) She had 
no knowledge of three additional collection accounts not listed in the SOR. For each of 
these delinquent accounts she said she intended to find out about the debts and make 
payment arrangements, if she owed the debts. (Item 6)  
 
 In Applicant’s January 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), she indicated she had not filed her 2007 income taxes due to a 
house fire. (Item 4) She indicated she was making $200 monthly payments on a $4,279 
debt (SOR 1.i). (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant’s January 2013 credit report lists the $4,279 judgment (SOR 1.j), six 
accounts being paid as agreed, and eight collection accounts. (Item 5) That credit report 
lists a $10,535 federal tax lien (SOR 1.e) filed against Applicant in August, 2011. (Item 
5) Additional tax liens were filed against her: $6,399 (SOR 1.h) filed in May 2005 and 
$8,793 (SOR 1.g) filed in April 2005. (Item 5, 6) These three federal tax liens total 
$25,667. Applicant admitted that a $31,601(SOR 1.f) tax lien was filed against her in 
September 2014. The FORM contains no evidence of that filing. It does not appear on 
her October 2014 credit report. (Item 7)  
 
At the time of Applicant’s January/February 2013 PSI, she stated her household 
income had been reduced by 80 percent due to the economy and her husband’s 
profession as a builder. She indicated she had not received financial counseling.  
 
The FORM repeatedly informed Applicant that she needed to submit 
documentation supporting her assertion she had made arrangement with the creditors 
or had made payments on her delinquent accounts. (FORM) In her SOR Answer, she 
indicated she had paid $200 to $500 several times on the debt listed in SOR 1.a 
($1,454). (Item 3) She indicated that she had arranged to make three payments on the 
$304 debt (SOR 1.b) and that it was to be paid in full by April 2015. She indicated her 
wages were being garnished to pay the IRS tax liens. She also stated she hoped to set 
up automatic withdrawals with the IRS. (Item 3) She stated she hoped to have all tax 
returns filed and to take action to resolve the IRS debt by April 2015. No documentation 
was received. She indicated she was paying or making arrangements with the creditors 
of her delinquent medical accounts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
5 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owes approximately $34,000 for an unpaid judgment, six collection 
accounts, one charged-off account, and three tax liens. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. She has been 
employed with her current employer since November 2012, but says she has had her 
job for 14 years. In January and February 2013, she was made aware of the 
Government’s concerns about her delinquent debt. She acknowledged some of her 
debts and would verify owing other debts. She stated if she owed the debts she would 
make arrangements to pay the debts. She has provided no documentation showing 
payment on any of her debts. Even the five smaller debts of approximately $300 or less 
remain unpaid. By failing to make payments she has failed to act responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 In early 2013, during Applicant’s PSI, she stated she intended to contact the IRS 
and arrange to file as married filing a separate return and arrange to pay her federal tax 
obligation. In December 2014, almost two years later, she again stated she intended to 
contact the IRS and arrange to file as married filing a separate return. She indicated she 
hoped to have arrangements made by April 2015. In May 2015, she received the FORM 
and informed she could submit documentation as to the status of her delinquent 
accounts. No documents were received. 
 
 Applicant has not acted responsibly in addressing her debts. She provided no 
evidence she has received credit or financial counseling. She has not demonstrated that 
her financial problems are under control or that she has a plan to bring them under 
control. She has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy her debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that the conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual other 
than her assertion that the IRS filed their 2007 and 2008 returns for them and failed to 
take her husband’s business expenses from his gross income. Applicant was asked 
about these obligations starting in January 2013 during her PSI and in her December 
2014 SOR. Given sufficient opportunity to address her financial delinquencies, Applicant 
has failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay the debts casts 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant states she has held her job for 14 years. 
She asserted a down-turn in the economy greatly affected her husband’s income as a 
builder. She asserts their household income was reduced by 80 percent. Additionally, in 
2008, her home burned, which is a devastating event. These are factors beyond her 
control. However, she failed to document these assertions.  
 
 
7 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. Additionally, there is no clear 
showing that her financial obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment 
on any of the delinquent accounts. She claims to have made payment on two debts and 
asserted one debt was to be paid by April 2015, but provided no documents supporting 
her claims. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because 
Applicant has not disputed any of the delinquent debts. She admitted all of the debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on her delinquent accounts. She has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about her delinquent debts since her January 2013 interview, which was 
reinforced by the December 2014 SOR. No delinquent debts have been paid and there 
is no documentation indicating that Applicant has recently contacted her creditors.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. She failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past 
efforts to address her delinquent debt. She failed to provide such information, and by 
relying solely on her paragraphs of explanation in her response to the SOR, she failed 
to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
8 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid her delinquent obligations, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed her 
past-due obligations, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  Against Applicant   
 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
