 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-05760 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1990, Applicant was arrested and charged with fiduciary misappropriation of 
$200 to $10,000, and in 2013, her employer fired her for misconduct. The allegations of 
fiduciary misappropriation are not recent, and the misconduct in 2013 is not sufficiently 
aggravated to independently establish a personal conduct security concern. Applicant’s 
statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 14 delinquent, charged-off, or collection accounts 
totaling $8,593. There is insufficient evidence of progress addressing Applicant’s 
financial problems. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 20, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On December 5, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make 
the affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On December 22, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and she 
waived her right to a hearing. (Item 1) A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM), dated April 30, 2015, was provided to her on May 15, 2015.  Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 24, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.e through 1.m, and 2.a and 2.b. She denied the remaining SOR financial allegations. 
(Item 1) She also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (Item 1) Her 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old business analyst, manager, human-resource 
supervisor, self-employment verifier, and cleaning services business owner.2 In 1981, 
she graduated from high school; in 2002, she received a bachelor’s degree; and in 
2010, she was awarded a master’s degree. She has never served in the military. In 
1998, she married, and in 2010, she divorced. In 1989, her daughter was born, and in 
1995, her son was born. There is no evidence of drug abuse, alcohol abuse, or criminal 
offenses in more than 20 years. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in the following exhibits: her 
June 20, 2014 SF 86; her July 1, 2014, and April 9, 2015 credit reports; and her SOR 
response. (Items 1, 4, 5) Applicant’s SOR alleges 14 delinquent, charged-off, or 
collection accounts totaling $8,593. The status of her SOR financial allegations is as 
follows: 10 delinquent medical accounts totaling $1,340 in ¶ 1.a for $64, ¶ 1.b for $79, ¶ 
1.e for $167, ¶ 1.g for $261, ¶ 1.h for $62, ¶ 1.i for $60, ¶ 1.j for $160, ¶ 1.k for $130, ¶ 
1.l for $130, and ¶ 1.m for $226; collection bank account in ¶ 1.c for $456; collection 
vehicle account in ¶ 1.d for $4,172; charged-off account in ¶ 1.f for $1,459; and credit-
union collection account in ¶ 1.n for $1,166. (Item 1) 
 
On December 22, 2014, Applicant signed her SOR response, and she said she 
had made payment arrangements on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s June 20, 2014 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
1.l, and 1.m. (Item 1) She said the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h was paid; she was unable to 
identify the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.j; and she received an Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) Form 1099C for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n. (Item 1) The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e for $167 
does not appear in her 2015 credit report. (Item 4)  
 
Applicant disputed her responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, indicating this 
debt was allocated to her former husband in their divorce. (Item 1) She provided a copy 
of her June 2010 divorce decree, which corroborates her claim that the debt was 
allocated to her husband by the family court judge in her divorce. (Item 1)  
 
Applicant did not describe any financial counseling, provide a budget, or disclose 
any unemployment, except for unemployment for 40 days in 2013. (Item 3) She did not 
provide copies of any payment plans, documents showing payments to SOR creditors, 
IRS Form 1099Cs, copies of disputes sent to creditors or credit reporting companies, or 
other correspondence to or from creditors. 
 
Applicant’s FORM states that she had 30 days after receipt “to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate.”    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In 1990, Applicant was charged with fiduciary misappropriation. (Item 2)3 She 
received deferred adjudication with two years of probation. (Item 2) She believed her 
record was cleared after the two years of probation elapsed. (Item 2) In her Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI) Applicant said she 
diverted insurance payments from one insured’s account to another without the consent 
of the policyholders. (Item 3) She did not admit to taking any funds for her own use. 
(Item 3) The file does not contain court records or any police report concerning the 
offense.   
 
Applicant’s June 20, 2014 SF 86 notes that in 2013, she “quit [her] job after being 
told that [she] would be fired.” (Item 2) She said she quit due to “unfair treatment.” (Item 
2) Her SOR response states, “I was terminated for Misconduct, however I have never 
been terminated in the past. This termination was due to hearsay; I attempted to clear 
my name, unfortunately I was not successful.” (Item 1) In her OPM PSI, she said she 
received a thumb drive from a coworker, who wanted her to review his resume. (Item 3) 
She told someone about the content of a personal letter she found on the coworker’s 
thumb drive, and she was reported to her supervisor. (Item 3) The file does not contain 
any interviews of her coworkers. (Item 3) There is no evidence contradicting her 
statement about why she was terminated from employment in 2013. 
 
 
 
                                            
3SOR ¶ 1.o cross-alleges the 1990 misappropriation of funds as a financial considerations 
concern. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
      
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SF 86, credit reports, SOR 
response, and hearing record establish AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Her SOR alleges 14 
delinquent, charged-off, or collection accounts totaling $8,593. Further inquiry about the 
applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to all debts. Applicant was 
unemployed for 40 days in 2013. She was divorced in 2010. These are circumstances 
that adversely affected her finances, and they were largely beyond her control. 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant said she was unable to locate the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e for $167, and it does not 
appear in her 2015 credit report. I have credited her with mitigating the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant receives partial, not full mitigation for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for 
$4,172 because she has a legal responsibility to pay this debt, if her husband fails to do 
so. Her remedy is to either seek enforcement in family court of the divorce decree, or to 
seek a release or settlement from the creditor. She is credited with having a good-faith 
belief that she is not responsible for this debt because of her divorce decree.  
   
 Applicant did not provide documentation showing her income and expenses, and 
she did not submit a budget. She presented insufficient evidence about what she has 
done over the last two years to pay her SOR debts or her other debts. She did not 
provide the following documentation relating to the SOR creditors: (1) proof of 
payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter 
from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact with the 
creditor;5 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as 
settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve these SOR 
debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress or 
resolution of her SOR debts.  She failed to pay four medical debts of less than $100. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to prove that she has made more substantial steps to resolve 
her debts shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of 
her security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that she was unable to make 
greater progress resolving her delinquent debts, or that her financial problems are being 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, 
she failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are mitigated. 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 16 depicts two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources. 
 
 In 1990, Applicant misappropriated funds, and in 2013, she quit in lieu of being 
terminated by her employer for viewing private information on a coworker’s flash drive. 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 describes two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case as follows: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 In 1990, Applicant misappropriated funds. The 1990 criminal offense is not 
recent, and she has not engaged in criminal offenses after 1990. In 2013, Applicant 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
viewed personal information on a flash drive she said her coworker provided to her. She 
discussed the private information with another person. This offense is noncriminal, and 
she has been sensitized about the importance of privacy. Violation of a coworker’s 
privacy is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply, and personal conduct 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 52-year-old business analyst, manager, human-resource supervisor, self-
employment verifier, and cleaning services business owner.  In 2010, she was awarded 
a master’s degree. In 2010, she divorced. She was unemployed for 40 days in 2013. 
Her unemployment and divorce are circumstances beyond her control that contributed 
to her financial problems. She disclosed some of her financial problems on her June 20, 
2014 SF 86. There is no evidence of use of illegal drugs, alcohol abuse, or criminal 
offenses in more than 20 years. 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Her SOR alleges 
14 delinquent, charged-off, or collection accounts totaling $8,593. The debt in SOR ¶ 
1.e for $167 is mitigated; however, she failed to provide sufficient documentation of 
progress resolving her other SOR debts. Her failure to provide more corroborating 
documentation shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises 
unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts or 
documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude 
that grant or reinstatement of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this 
time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in 
the future. With more effort towards resolving her past-due debts, additional 
corroborating documentation of debt resolution, and a track record of behavior 
consistent with her obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of her worthiness for access to classified information.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude personal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
Access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.n:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
