 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02991 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has not established a track 
record of debt repayment or reduction. Ultimately, he did not present sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns raised by his $12,000 in delinquent debts. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing,2 which convened 
as scheduled on April 14, 2015. Without objection, I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. After the hearing, Applicant submitted 
AEs B through I, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the transcript 
(Tr.) on April 22, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 27, has worked for a federal contractor since October 2012 as a truck 
driver and materials handler. On his security clearance application, also submitted in 
October 2012, he disclosed some derogatory financial information. The ensuing 
investigation confirmed that Applicant owes approximately $12,000 on 12 delinquent 
accounts.4  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his immaturity. As a young adult, 
he incurred debt without regard for his ability to repay it. Before accepting his current 
position, Applicant’s work history consisted of low-paying jobs and temporary work. He 
is now financially stable and earns $50,000 annually. However, recent events have 
compromised his ability to repay his delinquent debt. Applicant is the father of two 
children, ages 7 and 8. In April 2014, he filed for and received emergency custody of his 
two children. He does not receive child support from their mother. Since August 2012, 
Applicant has incurred at least $3,500 in legal and guardian ad litem fees related to the 
custody of his children. Since 2009, Applicant has also been paying a $12,000 child 
support arrearage ($8,000 principal, $4,000 interest). The court abated his child support 
in April 2014, but he continues to pay the arrearage.5 
 
 Applicant is engaged and lives with his fiancée and his two children. Until 
October 2014, he provided the only source of income for the household. Now that his 
fiancée has completed school, she is working full-time and contributing toward 
household expenses. Based on their current budget, they have a net remainder of 
approximately $960 each month after paying the recurring household bills. While the 
majority of that net remainder has gone to funding the Applicant’s custody dispute, he 
has made some payments toward the loan accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($752) and 
1.g ($684), reducing the balances by $144 and $236, respectively. Applicant tried to 
enter payment plans on both debts simultaneously, but realized that he could only afford 
to pay one at a time. He made the last payment of $76 on SOR ¶ 1.f in February 2011, 
and the last payment of $10 on SOR ¶ 1.g in June 2014.  In 2014, Applicant tried to 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated December 30, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE II.  
 
4 GE 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Tr. 14, 16, 18, 24-27; AE C-F. 
 
3 
 
enroll in a debt repayment plan. However, after completing the initial consultation, he 
realized that he could not afford the proposed plan payments. He intends to pay the 
remaining SOR debts as he is able. Currently, Applicant lives within his means. He has 
not incurred any additional debt since he began working in 2012.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 20-24, 31-37; GE 3, 5; AE B, I. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $12,000 on 12 delinquent accounts. The 
allegations are supported by the record, establishing the government’s prima facie case. 
Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his bills and a history of financial 
problems resulting in unresolved delinquent debts.8 Applicant’s financial problems were 
caused by his immaturity and poor financial habits in his early twenties. Although he is 
now financially stable and responsible, circumstances beyond his control have 
prevented him from being able to address his delinquent debt. Applicant has made 
payments toward the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. However, he did not 
provide sufficient information to show a consistent track record of debt repayment or 
reduction. Applicant’s finances remain a security concern that must be resolved in favor 
of the Government.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to justify the granting of a 
security clearance. The award of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-life-time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. A clearance is not recommended with Applicant’s current 
circumstances, but should he be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted. 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e, 1.h - 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.g    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
