 
1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03875 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He accumulated a substantial 
amount of delinquent debt. He failed to present evidence of having taken responsible 
action to address his past-due debts. Financial considerations security concerns 
remain. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 13, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On October 27, 2014, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. On January 28, 2015, I was assigned the case. On 
January 28, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing convened on February 12, 2015. I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through F, without objection. 
Applicant testified at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional information. Two additional documents were received and admitted as Ex. G 
and H, there being no objection to the documents. On February 24, 2015, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all but two of the delinquent 
accounts (SOR 1.n, for $157 and SOR 1.p for $50) listed in the SOR. His admissions 
are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old aircraft painter and shift lead who has worked for a 
defense contractor since June 1987, and seeks to maintain a confidential security 
clearance. (SOR Answer) Applicant was married from 1985 through 1989. (Tr. 29) He 
married for a second time in 1991, separated in December 2009, and divorced in 
October 2011. (Ex. 1 and 2, Tr. 30) He provided no documentation or testimony as to 
how his finances were affected by the separation and divorce other than to say he did 
not owe a $157 debt (SOR 1.n) for television service. He denied the TV service debt 
(SOR 1.n, $157) because his wife failed to switch the account to her name for two 
months following their separation. (SOR Answer, Tr. 38) Applicant has a son and a step 
son.  His son is in college and his step son is a 2009 U.S. Naval Academy graduate. 
(SOR Answer) 
 
Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, and friends state: Applicant has a high work 
ethic, an exemplary record as a worker, shift lead, and inspector. (Ex. C and D) He is 
highly regarded by his supervisors and managers as a valuable asset to the corrosion 
control program. He has been employee of the month three times. (Tr. 27) He has 
shown only remorse for his poor judgment in these financial matters. (Ex. D)  
 
 In January 2014, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On his e-QIP he listed 12 delinquent accounts 
totaling more than $22,000. (Ex. 1) Approximately half of the debt ($11,528) was due to 
the repossession of a 2003 Ford Mustang automobile. (Ex. 1) At the hearing he stated, 
“I won’t deny the fact that I made poor judgments as far as my finances go.” (Tr. 13) He 
has “thought about filing bankruptcy,” but does not know whether to file now. (Tr. 27) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant had gastric bypass surgery. Prior to the surgery his doctor had 
given him six months to live. (Tr. 21, SOR Answer) In a year and a half he lost 300 
pounds. However, six months after the surgery complications caused him to miss 10 
 
3 
 
days of work for which he was not paid. The loss of income started his financial 
problems.  
 
 By 2009, Applicant’s credit card was at its maximum (SOR 1.o, $10,571). (SOR 
Answer, Ex. 2) He applied for a loan to pay off the credit card. The loan was 
disapproved and his interest rate was increased because he had not made timely 
payments on the account. (Tr. 23) His monthly credit card payment jumped from $200 
to $300. At that time, braces for his youngest son caused him to forgo payment on 
some of his debts. He stated he chose to “walk away” from the debt. (SOR Answer).  
 
 After Applicant separated from his wife, he attempted to pay all the bills. In 2008, 
he stopped paying his debts. (Ex. 2, page 5) In February 2014, Applicant had a 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) during which he was asked in depth about his 
delinquent accounts. (Ex. 2) In his PSI, he states he did not try to work with his creditors 
to resolve his delinquent debts. (Ex. 2, page 5) He did not take calls from his creditors, 
but received voice message from collection agencies. He never returned any calls to 
collection agencies. (Ex. 2, page 6)  
 
 In Applicant’s PSI, he indicated he had two credit cards (SOR 1.a, $1,366 and 
SOR 1.h, $1,797) he used for everyday purchases, which has been placed for 
collection. (Ex. 2, page 5 and 6) He had a $1,431 charged-off account. (Ex. 2) The SOR 
lists a $1,476 collection account (SOR 1.b), which was a credit card account used for 
new tires and suspension on his vehicle. (Tr. 42) He incurred a $454 debt (SOR 1.d) for 
repairs to the transmission of his son’s truck. (SOR 2, page 6) The debt has been 
charged off. He incurred a debt to a men’s clothing store (SOR 1.g, $1,025) that 
remains unpaid. (Ex. 2) He has an unpaid department store debt (SOR 1.c, $503). He 
indicated he had two additional unpaid accounts opened in 2005 on which $565 and 
$1,500 are delinquent. In 2006, Applicant opened an account to buy drums and guitars 
for his sons. (Ex. 2, page 7, Tr. 44) He stopped making payments on the account. He 
owes approximately $1,000 on the account, which remains unpaid. (Ex. 2) 
 
 In Applicant’s e-QIP, he states he purchased a 2003 car on which he owed 
approximately $11,528.2 (Ex. 1) In his PSI, he stated he purchased a vehicle in 2007 for 
approximately $22,000. (Ex. 2) The monthly car payments of $500, gasoline costs, and 
insurance totaled $1,100 monthly. (SOR Answer) The vehicle was classified as a high-
performance vehicle, which doubled the cost of his automobile insurance. (Tr. 42) It 
required premium gasoline and got approximately eight miles to the gallon. (Tr. 42)  
 
 In 2008, Applicant could no longer afford the monthly payment and attempted to 
return the vehicle. (Tr. 24) The dealer said it would be better if the car was repossessed, 
and it was the following week. He believed that, at the time of repossession, he owed 
approximately $20,000 on the car, and it sold at auction for around $10,000. (Ex. 2, 
page 7) He had the car a year and a half before it was repossessed. (Tr. 42) Applicant 
                                                          
2 $9,724 was written off and $11,578 was past due as of January 2013. (Ex. B) 
 
 
4 
 
has not contacted the creditor and has no plans to pay the debt. (Ex. 2) He owed 
$11,578 (SOR 1.e) on the debt. In July 2007, he purchased tires for $1,476 (SOR 1.b), 
and he owed $1,375 (SOR 1.f) for repairs to his son’s truck. (Ex. B, Tr. 43)  
 
 In November 2014, Applicant was notified by the IRS that his 2012 taxable 
income had been increased by $8,817, which increased his tax by $2,200. (Ex. H, Tr. 
46) He asserted, but provided no documentation, that the increase was due to the 
forgiveness of the debt (SOR 1.e) that followed the repossession of his vehicle. (Tr. 46) 
He said he had not received an IRS Form 1099, Cancellation of Debt, from the creditor 
holding the debt. (Tr. 46) 
 
 During the PSI, Applicant was asked about all of the delinquent accounts now 
listed in the SOR. He did not recognize some of the creditors, but assumed that the 
account had been sold from one collection agency to another. He did not dispute the 
accounts. In his SOR answer he admitted all but two of the SOR debts. In his PSI, he 
admitted owing the two debts (SOR 1.n, $157 and SOR 1.p, $50). He asserted he paid 
the $50 (SOR 1.p) medical debt. (Tr. 39) 
 
 Applicant’s February 2015 credit report lists all the charged-off and collection 
SOR debts except four (SOR 1.i, SOR 1.j, SOR 1.p, and SOR 1.q). (Ex. B) However, 
his January 2014 credit report (Ex. 4) lists all four of these accounts. The credit report 
lists the date the accounts became past due and the date they were charged off or the 
date the accounts will remain on the record. (Ex. B) The February 2015 credit report 
lists six open accounts in good standing on which Applicant was were never late with 
payment, 23 closed and paid accounts that were never late, and one transferred 
account that was never late. (Ex. B)  
 
 In his February 2014 PSI, Applicant indicated it was bad judgment in acquiring 
the debt, that the debt is his responsibility. However, aside from paying the one $50 
debt prior to February 2014, he has no plans to pay any of the delinquent debts 
because he does not have the means to do so. (Ex. 2, page 13) He has no credit cards 
and no intentions of obtaining credit cards. (Ex. 2, page 14, Tr. 25) He pays cash for 
most purchases. 
 
 In 2012, Applicant’s mother was diagnosed with cancer. Her treatment was 
successful, but she needs assistance in day-to-day activities. Applicant is her primary 
caregiver. (Tr. 20) He has taken her to every doctor’s appointment, chemo treatment, 
and radiation treatment. (Tr. 20) During the four months she was in a nursing home for 
rehabilitation, he was there three times a day. (Tr. 20) He currently visits her twice a 
day. He visits her before going to work and again after leaving work. (Tr. 21) He spends 
his free time surfing, motorcycle riding, running obstacle courses, and is involved in 
martial arts. (Ex. 2, Tr. 28) Applicant has $65,525 in his company’s retirement program. 
(Ex. G)  
 
 Applicant’s gross income for 2012 was $67,891. (Ex. H) His 2000 pickup truck is 
paid for. He pays $900 monthly for rent and utilities. (Ex. A) He pays $700 for 
 
5 
 
automobile insurance, gasoline, and telephone bill. He pays his son $400 monthly, plus 
he pays $150 monthly for son’s vehicle repairs, pays $257 on his son’s car, and $250 
for tuition. (Ex. A, Tr. 35) In July 2014, Applicant bought a motorcycle on which he owes 
$4,800. (Tr. 26) He pays $250 monthly on his motorcycle. (Ex. A, Tr. 32, 34) He pays 
$280 monthly for his, his mother’s, his son’s, and his son’s girlfriend’s telephone 
services. (Tr. 40) His monthly income is $3,800 and the above listed monthly expenses 
total $3,360 leaving $440 per month for food and all other monthly expenses. (Ex. A)  
 
 Applicant stated: 
 
. . . once I walked away from the credit card and then I turned in the 
vehicle, and the rest of these, I just decided, you know, I’m struggling. My 
life has to move forward. And, you know, I walked away from the debts. 
That was my bad. You know, I admit that. (Tr. 39) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
6 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems starting in 2008. Applicant owed 
more than $38,000 on 17 past-due obligations. Five of Applicant’s debts are each 
approximately $500 or less. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. He 
has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. He has no plans to pay his 
delinquent debts and has chosen to simply “walk away” from the debts. He has not 
made any recent payment on his delinquent debts, nor has he had recent contact with 
the majority of his creditors. His only recent communication was with the creditor 
regarding the debt listed in SOR 1.e.  
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts and financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. 
There is little evidence that he was substantially affected by circumstances beyond his 
control. His 2007 surgery resulted in being unpaid for ten days in 2007 or 2008. He 
failed to show the financial impact of his 2009 separation and 2011 divorce. He has not 
acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He has not demonstrated that his financial 
problems are under control, or that he has a plan to bring them under control.  
 
In 2008, Applicant “walked away” from his $220 monthly payment on his credit 
card debt and the $500 monthly payment on his car. Even though he was no longer 
paying the $700 monthly obligation on these two debts, he was unable to pay his other 
credit card obligations or other debts. Numerous accounts went delinquent and remain 
unpaid. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant has been employed at the same job since June 1987. In February 
2014, he was questioned in depth about his delinquent debts. At that time he had paid a 
$50 debt (SOR 1.p). He has made no payments since. Applicant has failed to act timely 
or responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to resolve his debts and failed to 
reduce his delinquencies.  
 
Good-faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. Even if 
Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his or her control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since 
acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case 
No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 
(App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because the only 
debt Applicant disputes is the $157 television service debt. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(d) has limited application and applies to the $50 medical debt he paid 
prior to February 2014. To date, his efforts to address the majority of his delinquent 
accounts have been minimal. He has failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to 
resolve his delinquent debts. It appears, the creditor holding the debt following the 
repossession of his automobile has written off the debt and that income was included as 
part of Applicant’s 2012 taxable income. I find for him as to this debt. I find for him as to 
the $157 television service debt that he says is his ex-wife’s responsibility. Even with 
these three debts addressed, more than $26,000 in delinquent debts remains. 
 
Applicant has little or no funds to address his past-due obligations. He has 
$3,360 in monthly income of which he pays more than $1,000 monthly to his son, to pay 
for his son’s car repairs, car loan, tuition, and telephone, and also his son’s girlfriend’s 
telephone. He has $440 per month for food and all other expenses.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is very limited evidence in 
favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He is an excellent worker.  He has been in his 
position 27 years, and been employee of the month three times. He no longer has credit 
cards and is making timely payments on his current obligations. However, he has not 
initiated any effort to address his delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant has little ability and no intention of paying his delinquent accounts. He 
incurred the debts and simply chose to walk away and not pay the debts. He 
acknowledged he has shown poor judgment concerning his finances.  
 
An applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt 
listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan 
to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I 
must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a 
reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there 
is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt 
plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.p:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
