 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03909 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
 July 9, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
in debt to five creditors in the approximate amount of $132,942. His home was 
foreclosed upon in 2013. He is resolving or has resolved all of his delinquencies. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 17, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 4, 
 
2 
 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 20, 2015, scheduling the hearing for May 22, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through L, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. 
The record was left open for receipt of additional documents. On June 29, 2015, 
Applicant presented AE M through AE P.1 Department Counsel had no objections to AE 
M through AE P and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 2, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since 2007. He has held a Top Secret security clearance since 2008. He is 
divorced and has no children. (GE 1; AE K; Tr. 53.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt to five creditors in the 
approximate amount of $132,942. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. His debts 
are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
(Answer; GE 2; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to his divorce. He was financially 
and emotionally unable to resolve his delinquencies that resulted from the dissolution of 
his marriage in 2012. He acknowledged he made mistakes with his finances at that 
time, and is now working to correct them. (Tr. 28-29, 40-45, 55-71.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a primary mortgage account that was past due in the 
amount of $39,000, with a total loan balance of $390,000, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
was indebted on second mortgage for the same home, in the amount of $71,621, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant purchased his wife’s childhood home from his then in-
laws in 2006 for $518,000. He put $52,000 down toward the home’s purchase and 
financed the rest, through the two mortgages in dispute. Applicant was the only name 
on the loans because his ex-wife did not have good credit when they married. Both of 
their names were on the deed. They were current on the mortgages from 2006 to 2011. 
In 2011 during the divorce proceedings, Applicant’s ex-wife was awarded exclusive use 
and possession of the home. Applicant stopped making the mortgage payments. He 
acknowledged he made a mistake, but at the time, he could not emotionally justify 
paying on the home where his ex-wife and her boyfriend were living. The home was 
foreclosed upon in 2013. It was sold for $395,000, which satisfied the first mortgage. 
Applicant’s April 2015 credit report reflects the second mortgage as “account paid for 
less than full balance.” Both debts are resolved. (GE 6; AE O; Tr. 28-29, 40-45, 55-71.)  
 
Applicant was indebted on a vehicle loan in the amount of $12,479, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. This vehicle belonged to Applicant’s ex-wife and was purchased in 2011, 
                                                          
1 Applicant labeled his additional exhibits AE L through AE O. I have renamed them to avoid having two 
exhibits named AE L.  
 
3 
 
during their marriage. Applicant co-signed the loan. His ex-wife made the payments on 
the vehicle and was assigned physical and financial responsibility for it during the 
divorce. However, about three months after the divorce, she stopped making payments 
on it. The vehicle was repossessed in 2013. On May 15, 2015, Applicant reached a 
payment agreement with this creditor. Applicant made a $150 payment to this creditor 
on June 23, 2015, according to the terms of the agreement. This debt is being resolved. 
(AE L; AE N; Tr. 33-38, 71-75.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the amount of 
$9,555, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He stopped making payments on this credit card in 
2012, around the time the divorce proceedings were initiated. Applicant recently initiated 
a monthly repayment agreement with this creditor. He paid $75 to this creditor on May 
15, 2015, and June 15, 2015, in accordance with that agreement. This debt is being 
resolved. (AE B; AE M; Tr. 27-32, 75-77.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent medical account in the amount of $287, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He presented a letter from this creditor, dated April 20, 2015, 
which shows this debt was paid in full. This debt is resolved. (AE A; Tr. 25-26.) 
 
Applicant’s budget shows he has approximately $507 left at the end of the month 
after meeting his monthly expenses. (AE C.) He has approximately $3,000 in his 
savings account. He also has $14,925 in a 401(k) savings plan. (AE G.) He is current on 
all of his revolving credit accounts. (GE 6.) 
 
His performance reviews show that Applicant meets his performance objectives. 
(AE H.) He earned an employment-based award in April 2014 for his “extremely hard” 
work. (AE I.) He was recently promoted to a higher grade level. (AE I.) His facility 
security officer noted that Applicant pays “consistent attention to details” when it comes 
to security policy. Applicant’s family, friends, co-workers, and management believe 
Applicant is honest, responsible, conscientious and diligent. (AE J.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was in debt to five creditors in the approximate amount of $132,942. 
He became delinquent on these debts in 2012. He also lost his home to foreclosure in 
2013. His two mortgages were resolved through foreclosure and his consumer debts 
remained unaddressed until shortly prior to the hearing, despite his positive monthly 
remainder. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 fully apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt and foreclosure were due, in part, to irresponsible 
financial choices made from 2012 to 2015. His choices were emotional choices made 
out of the angst from his divorce and are unlikely to occur in the future. He has finally 
recovered emotionally and is taking responsibility for his poor judgment during and after 
his divorce. He recently resolved one debt and is making payments on two others. He 
has no liability on his mortgage obligations. He is current on all of his revolving credit 
accounts. He has a significant monthly surplus. Applicant has demonstrated that his 
financial problems are resolved. His past financial problems do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
respected by his colleagues and performs well at work. No new delinquencies have 
been incurred. He has sufficient income to satisfy his monthly obligations, including his 
payment agreements with his remaining creditors. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
