 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-04163 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: 
John B. Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
Bryan J. Olmos, Esq, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns raised by his marijuana use and drug-related arrest after being granted a 
security clearance. Notwithstanding the presence of some favorable evidence, his 
conduct continues to raise questions about his eligibility for access to classified 
information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the criminal conduct, drug involvement, and personal conduct 
 
2 
 
 
guidelines.1 On November 17, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 On April 30, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled, with the 
agreement of the parties, for July 14, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. At 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – E. He requested additional time post-
hearing to submit further documentary evidence. I granted his request, and he timely 
submitted Ax. F. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on July 22, 2015, and the record closed on July 24, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, 25, began using marijuana in 2012, during his senior year in college. 
He continued to use marijuana following his graduation, submission of a security 
clearance application (SCA), starting his employment as a federal contractor, and after 
being granted a security clearance. He inadvertently failed to list his past marijuana use 
on his SCA.  
 
In late 2012, Applicant was stopped by police for speeding. A subsequent search 
of his car uncovered marijuana and drug paraphernalia. He was arrested and charged 
with drug-related offenses. After completing court-mandated drug counseling, his case 
was dismissed by civilian authorities. The discharge summary from the court-mandated 
drug program, which is signed by a licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor, states 
that Applicant’s prognosis is good, provided he remain abstinent from the use of mood 
altering substances for a minimum of at least one year.2 Applicant states that he has not 
been involved with illegal drugs since his arrest, and submitted a negative drug screen 
from November 2014.3  
 
 Applicant, after seeing a poster in his office regarding the requirement to self-
report adverse information, informed his company’s facility security officer about his 
arrest. He did so about a month after the arrest. He was subsequently interviewed by an 
investigator conducting his initial background investigation. Applicant voluntarily 
provided information regarding the arrest, as well as his past drug use. During the 
interview, Applicant stated his intent not to be involved with illegal drugs in the future. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Ax. A. 
 
3 Ax. B. 
 
3 
 
 
He subsequently submitted a signed letter of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future 
on condition of automatic revocation of his clearance.4  
 
 Applicant has received favorable performance evaluations from his employer. 
The performance evaluations rate Applicant as “exceeds” expectations, with 
“exceptional work ethic.”5 They further reflect that Applicant’s leadership has complete 
confidence in his integrity and trustworthiness. Applicant’s supervisors submitted letters 
extolling Applicant’s work, honesty, and reliability.6 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.7  
 
                                                          
4 Gx. 2; Ax. F. 
 
5 Ax. D. 
 
6 Ax. E. 
 
7 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
4 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.8 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern regarding criminal conduct is explained at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s past illegal drug involvement, which culminated in his arrest for 
marijuana possession and drug paraphernalia, raises this security concern. It also 
triggers application of the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the 
criminal conduct concern. The following mitigating conditions warrant additional 
discussion: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
                                                          
8 Security clearance determinations are “not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a 
person’s security suitability.” ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004). An administrative 
judge is required to examine an individual’s past history and current circumstances to make a predictive 
judgment about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect and safeguard classified information. 
ISCR Case No. 11-12202; ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013).  
 
5 
 
 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug involvement ended almost three years ago, and has not 
been repeated. Before getting involved with marijuana during his senior year in college, 
Applicant did not engage in criminal activity. After his arrest, Applicant has not engaged 
in any type of criminal behavior that would call into question his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. His employment record is good. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (d) apply.9 Applicant’s past 
criminal conduct no longer raises a security concern.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use in 2012, especially after being granted a security 
clearance, raises the drug involvement concern. The record evidence establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse;10 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, . . . or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the drug 
involvement concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and only the 
following are relevant in this case: 
                                                          
9 The drug involvement mitigating conditions are the same or similar to some of the mitigating conditions 
listed under Guidelines H and E. Compare, AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), with, AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 26(a), 26(b). 
Additionally, all three guidelines state that disqualifying conduct may raise a concern about an individual’s 
judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness. Yet, each guideline represents a separate and distinct security 
concern. Thus, a favorable determination as to one guideline does not necessarily mean that an 
individual has mitigated concerns raised under a separate guideline(s).  
 
10 The Directive defines “drug abuse” as the “illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” See AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug involvement occurred primarily while he was in college 
and ended nearly three years ago. Furthermore, he has promised not to use illegal 
drugs in the future on condition of automatic revocation of his clearance. However, he 
used marijuana and was arrested for possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia 
after being granted a security clearance, which raises heightened concerns about his 
judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. Although 
Applicant convincingly testified that he was not specifically aware of his employer’s drug 
policy and the standards required for those granted access to classified information, he 
was generally aware that involvement with illegal drugs, to include marijuana, was 
incompatible with his employment as a federal contractor granted access to classified 
information. Instead of reforming his behavior to that required of all individuals granted a 
security clearance when he was hired as a federal contractor, Applicant decided to 
continue his involvement with illegal drugs. Under such circumstances, the favorable 
evidence is outweighed by the serious security concerns raised by his illegal drug 
involvement while possessing a security clearance.11 AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not 
apply. Applicant’s illegal drug involvement after being granted a security clearance 
remains a security concern.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s use of marijuana after being granted a 
security clearance as a concern under Guideline E. As explained previously, such 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 14-02203 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2015) (passage of five years since last used marijuana 
does not mitigate drug involvement concern because individual held clearance at time of use); ISCR 
Case No. 14-01551 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2014) (sustaining adverse determination, where individual’s puff 
from a marijuana cigarette occurred while holding a security clearance).  
 
7 
 
 
conduct calls into question Applicant’s judgment and willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. His conduct also establishes disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(c).12 I 
have considered all the mitigating conditions under Guideline E and, for similar reasons 
explained under the drug involvement guideline, find that none apply. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 13-01281 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014) (sustaining denial under Guideline E where 
applicant used marijuana after being granted a security clearance). 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s failure to list his past drug use on his SCA 
was deliberate and, therefore, disqualifying under Guideline E.13 Individuals seeking a 
security clearance must be fully upfront and candid on their application and during the 
ensuing background investigation. However, the omission of material, adverse 
information standing alone is not enough to establish that an individual intentionally 
falsified their SCA. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an individual’s true intent.14  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that the omission of his past drug use from his SCA 
was not intentional. His subsequent actions demonstrate that his failure to list his past 
drug use was a mistake. First, he self-reported his drug-related arrest to his FSO, 
contemporaneously with the arrest. Second, he fully cooperated with the ensuing 
security clearance background investigation by discussing the arrest. Third, he 
voluntarily disclosed and candidly detailed his past drug involvement to the background 
investigator. Cf. AG ¶ 17(a).15 His actions following the submission of the SCA are 
inconsistent with an individual who is attempting to hide or mislead the Government 
regarding his past drug involvement. Accordingly, I find that Applicant refuted the 
falsification allegation. However, as noted above, personal conduct concerns remain 
due to Applicant’s illegal drug involvement following the grant of a security clearance. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).16 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and 
                                                          
12 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that . . . when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not safeguard protected information. 
 
13 See AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
14 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005).  
 
15 The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts. 
 
16 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
8 
 
 
extenuating factors in this case, including Applicant’s relative young age when the 
conduct occurred, his honesty in self-reporting his drug-related arrest and correcting the 
omission of his past drug use on the SCA, his good employment record, and favorable 
character references. Applicant’s favorable evidence is admittedly substantial and may 
provide the basis for granting him eligibility for a clearance at some future point. 
However, at this time, the favorable evidence does not outweigh the serious security 
concerns raised by his involvement with illegal drugs after being granted a security 
clearance. Close cases, as the present one, must be decided in favor of national 
security.17 Consequently, the record evidence leaves me with doubts and questions 
about Applicant’s current eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant18 
  Subparagraph 3.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information at 
this time. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
17 Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
18 SOR 3.a cross-alleges the allegations under ¶¶ 1 and 2. This adverse determination and that under 
Guideline H only extends to Applicant’s illegal drug involvement after being granted a security clearance.  
