1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-02587 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 1, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. DOD issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated October 27, 2014, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 14, 2015. He admitted five of the debts 
(SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.l). While he admitted SOR 1.g, he did not agree to the 
amount of the debt. He denied six debts (SOR 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k), mainly 
because he did not have knowledge or information on the debts, or the debts were 
duplicates of debts he admitted. He did not provide a response for SOR debt 1.e, and it 
is considered a denial of the debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
May 5, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on May 11, 2015. DOD issued a notice 
of hearing on May 18, 2015, scheduling a hearing for June 3, 2015. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. The Government offered two exhibits that I marked and admitted 
into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2. Applicant 
testified but did not submit any exhibits. I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
June 10, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 59 years old and has been the vice-president of a defense contractor 
firm since January 2013. He has been married for 12 years and has two children. He 
served two tours on active duty in the Navy from February 1974 to November 1980, and 
from February 1983 until January 1993. He received an honorable discharge as a Chief 
(E-7). Applicant successfully had access to classified information while he was on active 
duty. His wife now works part-time at the local hospital, and contributes to the 
household income. Even with his wife’s income, Applicant does not have any monthly 
disposable income. He lives paycheck to paycheck. (Tr. 29-32, 48-49, 59-61); GX 1, e-
QIP, dated October 14, 2013) 
 
The SOR lists, and a credit report (GX 2, dated January 14, 2014) verifies, the 
following delinquent debts for Applicant: a judgment by a credit card company for 
$4,259 (SOR 1.a); an account in collection by the same credit card company for $6,187 
(SOR 1.b); a debt to a telephone company in collection for $174 (SOR 1.c); an account 
in collection for $31 (SOR 1.d); a bank debt in collection for $1,083 (SOR 1.e); a bank 
account debt to a different bank for $8,749 (SOR 1.f); a bank debt in collection for 
$15,794 (SOR 1.g); an account in collection for $7,285 (SOR 1.h); a medical account in 
collection for $731 (SOR 1.i); a television subscriber account in collection for $399 
(SOR 1.j); a medical account in collection for $342 (SOR1.k); and another television 
subscriber account in collection for $144 (SOR 1.l). The total amount of the debt in the 
SOR is $45,000. Applicant admitted to $28,000 of the debt. 
 
After leaving the Navy, Applicant was employed as a product manager for a 
firearms company from November 1997 until he was terminated in January 2009. While 
employed by this company, he received a six figure yearly income. Applicant was not 
clear why he was terminated, but he believes his superiors did not like his sales 
forecasts. After his termination, he went from a six figure income to no income. (Tr. 19-
20) 
3 
 
After his termination, Applicant tried to find employment in the firearms field in 
which he had experience. Sales were down and no company was hiring. He drew 
unemployment compensation but it was only $249 a week. It was not sufficient to 
sustain his family. His wife was not employed at the time, so she could not provide any 
income for the family. Applicant cashed in his former 401(k) account to continue to pay 
his bills.  He no longer has savings or a retirement account. He stopped using credit 
cards in 2011. When he could not find a job in the firearms industry, he looked for 
employment in any type of position. He applied for many jobs, and he had friends 
helping him look for work. In October 2009, he ran out of funds and turned to social 
services for support for his family. By the end of 2009, he finally found employment 
assembling trailers for $11 an hour. (Tr. 20-22) 
 
Even though he was working, he continued to look for a position commensurate 
with his experience. He received a job offer from a company that provided support to 
the forces in Afghanistan at a substantial salary. Before he could complete the 
documents required for him to qualify for the position, the Government terminated the 
contract for convenience. At the same time, his bank was foreclosing the mortgage on 
his house. The house lost value in the housing crisis at the time, and his mortgage was 
more than the value of the house. He was behind on mortgage payments because of 
his unemployment. Just before his house was to be sold at auction, he received an 
employment offer in June 2011 from a company to be a project manager that would pay 
him enough to again make his mortgage payments. He renegotiated the mortgage 
payments, and he is still current with his mortgage. (Tr. 22-23) 
 
Applicant worked for this company for approximately 18 months. He also had 
been in contact for some time with a former Navy shipmate who was the owner of a 
business. His friend asked him to come to work for him, and he started with the 
company in January 2013. He has been consistently employed with the company as a 
vice-president. He does not make as high a salary as he did before he was terminated 
in 2009, but he does make enough to pay his mortgage and take care of the present 
needs of his family. He renegotiated some debts not on the SOR and is current with 
those debts. This is verified by the credit report (GX 2). Applicant stated, and the credit 
reports verifies, that the large SOR debts were accumulated before his termination in 
2009. The medical and television service debts were incurred after his 2009 termination. 
He has not used a credit card since 2009. He presented no documentation to show 
payments made on any of the SOR debts. (Tr. 23-24)  
 
Applicant incurred the large credit card debts listed in the SOR when he was 
employed in the firearms industry and making a good salary. At the time, he had 
sufficient income to pay the debts he incurred. After losing his job in 2009, he and his 
family lived frugally. They did not go out to dinner or participate in other entertainment. 
He tried to pay his past-due debts one after another as funds became available. He was 
unable to pay some of his current bills leading to the medical and television service 
debts in the SOR. He spent about six month receiving food stamps for his family.  
 
4 
 
Applicant agrees he owes the debts that he admitted. He denied some debts 
because he believed they were duplicates of other debts. He has every intention of 
paying the debts when he has funds available. All of his debts were a direct result of a 
sudden, unexpected, and involuntary loss of employment. He tried everything he could 
to rectify his financial situation even to the point of volunteering for combat-related 
service in Afghanistan. His plan and intent is to pay each one of his debts in turn. He will 
complete paying a car loan shortly and will then move to another debt. (Tr. 24-33) 
 
Applicant tried to negotiate a settlement of the debt at SOR 1.a, but the creditor 
did not cooperate even though Applicant made six or seven $100 payments in 2011 and 
2012. The creditor placed a lien against his house for this debt. Applicant offered to pay 
the entire debt using the funds from refinancing the mortgage. The creditor refused to 
release the lien he had on the house so there was no agreement. Applicant has not 
made any payments on this account except the six or seven $100 payments he claims 
to have made. He did not provide any documents to verify the payments he claimed. 
(Tr. 34-39, 53-56) 
 
Applicant had only two accounts with the creditor for SOR 1.a and 1.b. Based 
upon this information, Applicant believes SOR 1.b is a duplicate of the SOR 1.a debt 
with interest and fees added. He admitted the debt at SOR 1.c, and has not had contact 
with the creditor or made any payments on the debt. He denied the debt at SOR 1.d. He 
has no idea of the origin of the debt. He would have paid a $31 dollar debt if he knew 
about it. Applicant admits the debt at SOR 1.e which is for a credit card he uses at a 
home improvement company. He has not contacted the creditor or made any payments 
on this debt. He has no recollection or information on the debt at SOR 1.f. Applicant 
admits the debt at SOR 1.g but thinks the amount is higher than he remembers. He has 
not made any payments on this account. He admits the credit card debt at SOR 1.h. He 
has not contacted the creditor or made any payments on this account. He denies the 
two medical debts (SOR 1.i and 1.k). He has no knowledge of the debts or the 
circumstances leading to medical debts. (Tr. 39-44) 
 
Applicant admits he at one time had television service from the creditor for SOR 
1.j. When his financial issues arose, the service was terminated with a balance due. He 
did not pay this bill. A few years later, he requested to again receive service from the 
company. He was advised by the company that they would provide the service and 
waived the past-due debt. He remained a customer of this company for over two years 
He admits he owes the debt listed at SOR 1.l. (Tr. 44-47)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Security clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her 
6 
 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk of acting inconsistently 
with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is 
required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial obligations. 
Applicant incurred debts when he was terminated from a good-paying job and could not 
find meaningful good-paying work for almost three years. He had small jobs during this 
time but they did not pay enough for him to meet all of his financial obligations. Even 
though he denied some of the debts because he had no knowledge of them, the credit 
report validates the debts. The delinquent debts, as established by Applicant’s 
admissions and the credit report, shows an inability to satisfy debt and raises the 
following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant accumulated debt prior to 2009 which he was able to satisfy because 
he had a good paying job. The debt became delinquent starting in 2009 when he was 
terminated from his good-paying job and could not find meaningful work for about three 
years. He tried very hard to find good employment but was not successful until June 
2011. He used his savings and applied for public assistance to meet his family’s needs. 
7 
 
He did not use credit cards and accumulated only limited additional debts. He is now 
again gainfully employed enjoying a good salary. The delinquent debts were incurred by 
circumstances beyond his control and are unlikely to recur since he is now fully 
employed. He acted reasonably under the circumstances since he sought employment 
and has not accumulated additional debt. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) apply.   
 
Applicant did not present any information that he sought or received financial 
counseling. The financial problems are not being resolved or under control. AG ¶20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
For a good-faith effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to 
repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
A systematic method of handling debts is needed. Applicant must establish a 
meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment 
can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through 
payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts in the future is not a substitute for 
a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial 
problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant has not established that he has paid any of his past-due financial 
obligations, or that he has a reasonable plan to pay any of his debts. Applicant has 
been gainfully employed since at least June 2011. He claims that he is living pay check 
to paycheck and has no funds to pay his delinquent debts. He has not presented 
information on any austerity measures he has taken to have discretionary funds to pay 
his debts. He did not present any information to show that he cannot make payments on 
his debts. His plan is to pay debts one at a time when funds are available. He has not 
shown the amount of funds that he may have available to him to pay debts. When he 
has paid a debt, he will move to the next debt. As noted above, a plan to pay debts in 
the future is not sufficient to establish a good-faith effort to pay the debts. While he 
states he paid a limited amount of his delinquent debt, he has not provided information 
or evidence to verify his claim, and the large majority of his delinquent debt is still 
outstanding. Applicant has not established a meaningful track record of debt payment. 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not shown that he manages his personal financial obligations 
reasonably and responsibly, and his lack of responsible financial conduct is likely to 
continue. There is ample evidence of irresponsible behavior, lack of good judgment, and 
financial unreliability. Based on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant 
has not mitigated security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
8 
 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s long and 
honorable service in the Navy. However, this information does not offset the significant 
information concerning Applicant’s irresponsible management of his finances. Applicant 
did not present sufficient information to establish that he acted reasonably and 
responsibly towards his finances. His financial track record does not establish 
confidence that he has or will responsibly manage his financial obligations. This 
indicates that he will not be concerned or act responsibly in regard to classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1:k and 1.l: Against Applicant 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
