 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02805 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. Although some of the 
alleged debts remain unresolved, Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on April 14, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE H through N, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on April 22, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 34, has worked as an electronics technician for a federal contractor 
and has held a security clearance since 2008. In August 2013, Applicant submitted a 
security clearance application to upgrade his clearance level. The ensuing investigation 
revealed that Applicant is indebted to 11 creditors for approximately $24,000 and that 
he previously had $20,000 in debts discharged in a 2005 bankruptcy.4 
 
 Applicant began having financial problems during his first marriage, which lasted 
from 2003 to 2008. He admits that he and his ex-wife had poor financial habits. They 
decided to resolve their marital debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. After the 
divorce, Applicant claims that his finances were stable until 2013. In 2012, Applicant 
and his ex-wife agreed to joint custody of their two children. Although they split physical 
custody, Applicant still paid child support. In 2013, Applicant ended a relationship with a 
girlfriend with whom he had been living and splitting household expenses. Living on his 
own with his children, he struggled to pay his recurring household expenses and child 
support. To reduce his expenses, Applicant voluntarily surrendered a vehicle to the 
creditor. The account, which is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, has a $6,200 deficiency balance, 
not the $18,000 alleged in the SOR.5  
 
In the fall of 2014, Applicant’s ex-wife reneged on their custody arrangement, 
resuming full, primary custody of the children. Applicant retained counsel. Since the end 
of 2014, Applicant has spent $3,800 in legal fees. Applicant and his ex-wife were 
scheduled to participate in a custody settlement conference in May 2015. He anticipates 
that the conference will not resolve the dispute. Applicant believes he will have to incur 
additional legal fees to litigate the issue further.6  
 
 To date, Applicant has resolved 3 of the 11 debts alleged in the SOR, ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1.h. He has entered into a payment plan of $300 per month for the auto loan 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE II.  
 
4 Tr. 18-19, 32; GE 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Tr. 19-23, 35-39, 57-60; AE N.  
 
6 Tr. 54-55, 60-63 
 
3 
 
deficiency balance alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g was discharged 
in Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy. Applicant admits that he owes the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.b ($1,148), but cannot afford to make payments at this time. Applicant has 
attempted to contact all of the creditors alleged in the SOR. He is disputing the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.i, and 1.j because he has been unable to verify them. At 
the time of this decision, Applicant had not received correspondence from the credit 
reporting agencies regarding the disposition of the disputed accounts. He has been 
unable to identify the creditor for the unidentified $132 medical account alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.k.7  
 
Applicant earns $46,000 annually and has amassed approximately $40,000 in 
retirement savings. He is in a new relationship and lives with his girlfriend. They split the 
recurring household expenses. After paying his share of the bills, Applicant has 
between $800 and $900 in disposable income each month. At hearing, Applicant 
testified that he lives comfortably within his means.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
7 Tr. 21-22, 24-31, 35, 42-48, 53; AE B-M. 
 
8 Tr. 51-54.  
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
Applicant admits that he owes approximately $24,000 on the 11 delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR. The credit reports in the record establish the 
government’s prima facie case. Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his bills 
and a history of financial problems, resulting in unresolved delinquent debts.10 However, 
Applicant has submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant did not incur debt under circumstances that reflect negatively on his security 
worthiness.11 While Applicant’s financial problems during his first marriage were caused 
by poor financial habits, his more recent financial problems were caused by a change in 
circumstances and his custody dispute with his ex-wife. Applicant has acted responsibly 
under the circumstances by contacting each of his creditors, disputing the debts he 
cannot confirm, and taking steps to resolve his delinquent debt.12 Applicant has 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debt by entering into a 
payment arrangement for his largest outstanding debt for $6,200 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
5 
 
resolving four other of the alleged accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.g), totaling 
$2,600.13  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about his suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s financial problems are not indicative of financial 
irresponsibility, poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules 
and regulations. While Applicant is not debt-free, he has established a sufficient record 
of debt repayment and debt reduction to mitigate the security concerns. Accordingly, his 
request for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 20(d). 
