 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01796 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concern under Guideline E (personal conduct), but 
failed to mitigate those concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, 
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on June 18, 2014, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On July 14, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 27, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 8. On April 2, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM 
and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply additional 
information. On April 29, 2015, he submitted a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on May 15, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had 21 delinquent debts 
totaling about $14,299 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.u) and that he issued three insufficient fund 
checks to the IRS between March 2012 and February 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.v). The SOR 
alleged under Guideline E that Applicant falsified his SCA in 2002 by failing to report 
that he used marijuana from about November 1982 to September 1984 while holding a 
security clearance (SOR ¶ 2.a). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each 
Guideline F allegation and denied the Guideline E allegation. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old training specialist who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since February 2008. He attended college for about four years, but 
had not received a degree. He served on active duty in the Army from September 1977 
to September 1992 and in the National Guard from January 1996 to February 2012. He 
received honorable discharges for his military service. He is married. In his SCA, he 
listed four children, ages 22, 23, 30 and 35; two stepchildren, ages 26 and 30; and a 
deceased child. He held a security clearance in the past.2 
 
 In 2006, Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with a chronic, disabling disease and 
was no longer able to work. He became the family’s sole means of support. Due to her 
inability to work, they lost about $24,000 in annual income. They have been working 
with a lawyer to obtain disability compensation for his wife, but that has been a lengthy 
process. They also incurred medical bills that were not covered by their health 
insurance. In 2011, his son was killed in a car accident while returning home from 
school. The loss of his son seriously impacted the family emotionally and financially. In 
2012, he retired from the National Guard after 32 years of service, which has further 
reduced his income. He will not receive military retirement pay until he reaches age 60. 
He applied for VA disability compensation and started receiving those payments in 
August 2014. The amount of his monthly disability compensation is about $900. As of 
July 2014, his VA benefits were apparently in an overpayment status and the VA was 
proposing a recoupment action.3 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 2. 
 
2 Items 2, 3, 5.  
 
3 Items 2, 5; Response to the FORM.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports reflect that the date of first delinquency (DFD) or date of 
last activity (DLA) for the alleged debts range from July 2007 to December 2013. Six of 
the debts had a DFD/DLA in 2013. In February 2013, Applicant was questioned about 
his delinquent debts during an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview and 
indicated he had not received credit counseling.4 
 
 In his July 2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
 a. that he would arrange monthly payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a;  
 
 b. that he would resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.q, and 1.r before 
the end of 2014; and 
 
 c. that he admitted owing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.p, but disputed 
the listed amounts, and indicated, if the amounts were found to be correct, he would 
make payments to satisfy the debts.  
 
Despite his representations in his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided no proof that 
he resolved any of those debts, made any payment arrangements for them, or made 
any payments towards them.5  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, he also claimed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.k are 
the same debt. However, these debts have different “opened dates” and balances. 
Insufficient evidence was presented to show these accounts are the same debt.6 
 
 In his Response to the FORM dated April 29, 2014, Applicant provided proof that 
his federal student loan (SOR ¶ 1.t) had a balance of $4,555; that it was in forbearance 
from July 10, 2014, to October 9, 2014; and that the government provided him a six-
year repayment schedule with payments starting on October 10, 2014. His most recent 
credit report dated March 26, 2015, reflected this debt was not past due, which supports 
a determination that he had been making the $34 monthly payments from October 2014 
to March 2015.7 
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant provided proof that he resolved the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($66), 1.l ($3,954), and 1.m ($551). The details of how he resolved 
those debts are unknown. He indicated that he brought up-to-date the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.r, but did not provide proof to confirm that statement.8 
                                                          
4 Items 5, 6, 7, 8. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Items 2, 6, 7, 8. 
7 Item 6; Response to FORM.  
8 Response to FORM.  
 
4 
 
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that he contacted the creditors 
of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.s for the purposes of 
making repayment arrangements, but noted that he had not paid off or made payments 
for those debts. He did not provide any information about what arrangements were 
made, when payments on those debts would begin, or the amount of those payments.9 
 
  In the Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that he was disputing the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.q. However, he provided no documentation substantiating 
the basis of the dispute.10 
 
 In his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he owed the federal government about 
$6,000 in past-due taxes for 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.u). This problem arose because he 
received severance pay from a job and income taxes were not withheld from that 
payment. When he filed his 2008 income tax return, he did not have the money to pay 
those taxes. In the OPM interview, he indicated the IRS withheld his subsequent tax 
refunds to offset the past-due taxes. In his Response to the FORM, he provided an IRS 
document that reflected the IRS withheld his 2014 income tax refund of $921 and 
applied it to taxes he owed for 2010. He still owes the IRS $935 in past-due taxes for 
2010. Why his income taxes were past-due for 2010 is unknown.11 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report reflected that he had three past-due debts 
that were not alleged in the SOR. These were a loan that was past due for $808, a 
cable/cellular account that was past due for $943, and his mortgage that was 30 days 
past-due for $780. This credit report also reflected that he opened an automobile loan 
for $15,183 in November 2014 and another loan in December 2014 for $1,114.12 
  
 Applicant provided no evidence that he received financial counseling. He did not 
provide a monthly budget. It is unknown whether he has any discretionary income 
remaining each month after payment of his expenses.  
 
 In his SCA dated February 8, 2013, Applicant disclosed that he used hashish 
from about November 1982 to September 1984 while holding a security clearance. In 
his OPM interview, he indicated that he ex-wife supplied the hashish and he smoked it 
                                                          
9 Response to FORM.  
10 Response to FORM.  
11 Items 1, 2, 3, 4; Response to FORM. Unalleged delinquent debt will not be considered in applying 
the disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in applying the mitigating conditions and making a 
whole-person assessment.  
12 Item 6.  
 
5 
 
 
due to peer pressure. He stopped smoking it because he knew that conduct was illegal 
and the Army was starting a drug testing program.13 
 
 In his SCA dated May, 9, 2002, Applicant answered “No” to the question that 
asked whether he “EVER illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law 
enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security 
clearance; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting public safety.” In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he did not remember purposely falsifying his 
response to that question and, if he answered it incorrectly, it was a mistake. He stated 
that he admitted to such drug use during previous investigations. Statements he made 
during previous investigations were not included in the FORM. 14 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
                                                          
13 Item 3.  
14 Item 4; Response to FORM.  
 
6 
 
 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:  
  
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Insufficient evidence was presented to establish that the dishonored checks alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.v amount to a deceptive or illegal financial practice such as check fraud under 
AG ¶ 19(d). The dishonored checks will still be considered in determining whether he 
has acted responsibly in handling his financial obligations.  
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing. Insufficient evidence was presented to 
conclude his financial problems are unlikely to recur. Since 2006, Applicant’s wife has 
been unable to work due to a chronic disease. In 2011, he and his wife lost a son in an 
automobile accident. His wife’s illness and the loss of their son were conditions beyond 
their control that contributed to their financial problems. Although he resolved the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.l, and 1.m and is making payments on the federal student loan in SOR 
¶ 1.t, Applicant does not merit full credit under AG 20(b) because he did not establish 
that he has acted responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts over the years. Many 
of the alleged debts are recent delinquencies. Some are relatively small debts (under 
$100), but they remain unresolved. His most recent credit report reflected delinquent 
 
8 
 
 
debts not alleged in the SOR. Little is known about Applicant’s financial situation. He did 
not provide documentation showing his income, expenses, and net monthly remainder. 
Insufficient evidence was presented to show that his financial problems are being 
resolved and are under control. His financial problems continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not 
apply. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debts that he has resolved or that are being resolved. 
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that he is disputing the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.q. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because he provided no 
documentation showing he has a legitimate basis for disputing those debts.    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
On his SCA dated February 8, 2013, Applicant disclosed that he used hashish 
back in the early 1980s while he possessed a security clearance. In his SCA dated May 
9, 2002, he did not disclose that he used illegal drugs while holding a security 
clearance. He claimed that he did not remember the circumstances of the earlier 
nondisclosure of such illegal drug use and any failure to report it must have been a 
mistake. He also claimed he previously disclosed such illegal drug use during security 
investigations. His claims are plausible. I find that the evidence does not support a 
conclusion that Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA 13 years ago. AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
applicable. Personal Conduct security concerns are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
 
9 
 
 
a determination.15 I gave due consideration to the information about Applicant in the 
record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating evidence, does 
not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence shows a lack of financial responsibility that weighs 
against granting a security clearance. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph   1.f:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.g–1.k:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.l–1.m:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.n–1.s:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.t–1.v:   For Applicant 
    
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:         For Applicant  
     Subparagraph 2.a:            For Applicant 
     
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
15 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
