 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04570 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 20, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On January 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated May 20, 2014). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
Involvement), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 11, 2015. In a sworn statement, dated 
March 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing.2 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on May 26, 
2015. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2015. A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on June 5, 2015, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on June 24, 2015.  
 
During the hearing, two Government exhibits (GE 1 and GE 2) and six Applicant 
Exhibits (AE A through AE F) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on July 1, 2015. The record 
closed on July 1, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under drug involvement (¶ 1.a.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a student assistant with his current employer, a well-respected, nationally 
known, university, since May 2014.3 He was unemployed from July 2013 until May 
2014. A May 2006 high school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s of science 
degree in May 2011.4 He continued his graduate studies in electrical engineering at the 
same university, but to date, he has not received his advanced degree.5 He has never 
served in the U.S. military.6 Applicant has never held a security clearance.7 He has 
never been married.8 
 
  
                                                          
2
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated March 3, 2015. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13-14. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12; AE A (Transcript, dated June 23, 2015), at 1.  
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12-13. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 30.  
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 22.  
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement  
 
Applicant was a substance abuser whose substance of choice was marijuana.9 
He did not experiment with marijuana while in high school, but in October 2010, upon 
reconnecting with a friend (Mr. A) from his high school years who was using marijuana, 
Applicant expressed an interest in doing so.10 After initially using marijuana at his 
friend’s apartment, as well as the apartments of Mr. A’s friends, Applicant started using 
marijuana alone in his own apartment. In his e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged having 
used “THC, such as marijuana, weed, pot, hashish, etc.” from October 2010 until at 
least March 2014. He quantified the frequency as approximately on a weekly basis for a 
period of three years, starting in late 2010 and continuing until 2014. Applicant 
estimated that he had used marijuana on approximately 250 occasions.11 He stated that 
since the start of 2014, he used marijuana on one occasion as he had been “largely 
focused on succeeding in school and procuring summer employment.”12 Applicant 
added that the position for which he is seeking a security clearance is basically a three-
semester-long job interview. He does not intend to risk losing his position especially not 
due to any factor within his direct control, such as marijuana use.13  
 
During his interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on June 27, 2014, Applicant said he smoked marijuana from a 
bowl alone at his residence two or three days a week. He purchased his marijuana from 
an individual (Mr. B) whose first name was revealed (Applicant could not recall the 
individual’s last name) for $60 per one-eighth of an ounce. In March 2014, Applicant 
smoked marijuana for two to three hours per day for seven straight days at his parents’ 
home during spring break.14 During that period, he purchased the marijuana from 
another friend (Mr. C) whose first name he revealed, but whose last name Applicant 
declined to reveal because he did not want to see his friend get into trouble. Applicant 
has also purchased marijuana from two other individuals (Messrs. D and E).15  
 
Applicant smoked marijuana, which he considered a recreational activity, 
because it enabled him to relax, and it caused him to be quieter and easy going.16 He 
ceased using marijuana because he does not want to lose his employment if he cannot 
                                                          
9
 Tr. at 24. 
 
10
 Tr. at 24-25. 
 
11
 Tr. at 32. 
 
12
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 28-29. 
 
13
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 29. 
 
14
 Tr. at 34. 
 
15
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 27, 2014), at 4. 
 
16
 GE 2, supra note 15, at 4; Tr. at 46. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
obtain a security clearance. He has never been arrested or charged for his drug 
involvement; failed a drug test; or received any drug counseling.17  
 
Applicant considers his past use of marijuana to be a mistake, and he does not 
question the fact that he violated state and federal laws in using marijuana. He now 
considers his past actions to be shortsighted and irresponsible. He regrets them 
unequivocally.18 Applicant does not intend to use any more drugs in the future, and he 
signed a statement of intent to remain abstinent with the understanding that any 
violation will result in the automatic revocation of his security clearance status.19 
 
As noted above, Applicant chose not to reveal the full names of his suppliers and 
those with whom he used marijuana. Mr. A currently resides in another state;20 Mr. B is 
deceased (attributable to drug involvement);21 Applicant sees Mr. C once every six 
months;22 and he keeps in close personal contact with Messrs. D and E.23 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s scoutmaster from his years in both the Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts 
noted that Applicant “embodied the principles of the Scout Oath and Law,” and he has 
grown up to be a responsible adult.24 A friend who has known Applicant since they were 
in middle school together, and who is currently an officer in the U.S. Army, considers 
Applicant to be a loyal friend and a diligent, conscientious worker. He has no reason to 
question Applicant’s integrity.25 A faculty member of the university where Applicant is a 
student assistant considers Applicant to be hardworking, professional, polite, 
straightforward, and honest.26  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
                                                          
17
 GE 2, supra note 15, at 4; Tr. at 50-51. 
 
18
 Tr. at 42, 45-47. 
 
19
 AE F (Statement of Intent, dated June 24, 2015). 
 
20
 Tr. at 25. 
 
21
 Tr. at 27, 49. 
 
22
 Tr. at 49. 
 
23
 Tr. at 49. 
 
24
 AE D (Character Reference, dated June 18, 2015). 
 
25
 AE B (Character Reference, dated June 22, 2015). 
 
26
 AE E (Character Reference, dated June 23, 2015). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
                                                          
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
                                                          
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition)”, is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 25(c) may apply where there is “illegal drug possession, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.”  
 
Applicant used marijuana on a weekly basis (generally two or three days per 
week), on approximately 250 occasions, for a period of three years, starting in October 
2010 and continuing until at least March 2014. In March 2014, Applicant smoked 
marijuana for two to three hours per day for seven straight days. He purchased his 
marijuana from several individuals, paying $60 per one-eighth of an ounce. Applicant’s 
actions were in violation of state and federal law. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) have been 
established.  
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is “a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation.” 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. AG ¶ 26(b) only minimally applies. Applicant’s 
marijuana abuse occurred on approximately 250 occasions over a period of three years, 
starting in October 2010 and continuing until at least March 2014 – a little over 15 
months ago. It was a recreational activity, and it enabled him to relax. As such, 
Applicant’s marijuana abuse was not long ago, infrequent, or under unusual 
circumstances. Applicant has never received any medical treatment, counseling, or 
education related to the substance abuse, and he has never been evaluated or 
diagnosed for substance abuse or dependence. Applicant intends to refrain from such 
use in the future, and he has submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any future violation. However, there is little evidence that 
Applicant has changed or avoided the environment where he used marijuana, or that he 
has disassociated himself from drug-using associates, suppliers, and contacts. To the 
contrary, Applicant sees Mr. C once every six months; and he keeps in close personal 
contact with Messrs. D and E. Applicant’s purported abstinence since March 2014 is 
viewed favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue it for a more appropriate 
period. Notwithstanding Applicant’s pledge for future abstinence, the relatively brief 
 
8 
                                      
 
period of abstinence, his continuing relationships, and remaining in the environment 
where he abused marijuana, continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H in my analysis below.      
 
There is some mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept. When he 
was younger, Applicant purportedly embodied the principles of the Scout Oath and Law. 
He is an outstanding employee who has apparently made significant contributions to the 
research mission of his employer. He has never received any medical treatment, 
counseling, or education related to the substance abuse, and he has never been 
evaluated or diagnosed for substance abuse or dependence. Applicant’s substance 
abuse purportedly ceased in March 2014, approximately 15 months ago. Applicant’s 
abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue it.  
 
There is also more substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. 
Applicant used marijuana on approximately 250 occasions, for a period of three years. 
In doing so, he was violating both federal and state law. There are three positive 
qualities associated with trustworthiness, reliability, and being an overall good security 
risk: a strong social consciousness, or willingness to abide by the rules; self-control, or 
the ability to exercise responsible and rational control over one’s impulses; and the 
capacity for making commitments, or the ability to maintain personal or job 
commitments over time. Applicant’s actions in the area of substance abuse indicate that 
he has shortcomings in at least two of these important areas. In turning to marijuana, he 
failed to respect authority, rules, and accepted standards of behavior, and it reflected 
poor self-control.  
 
9 
                                      
 
I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.33 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with some questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. See AG && 
2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9). For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
33
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
