 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-06684 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). On January 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H and E.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On February 19, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 2, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On April 8, 2015, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 22, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 
28, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received into 
evidence without objection. Applicant called seven witnesses, testified, and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and G, which were received into evidence without objection.  
 
 I held the record open until June 26, 2015 to afford Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE H through AE J, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On June 5, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with explanations. 
Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old systems software tester employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2012. He seeks a security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 14, 16-17, 22-23)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1992. He was awarded an 
associate’s degree in computer information systems in July 2005, and a bachelor of 
science degree in computer science in December 2014. (GE1; AE C, AE E, AE F; Tr. 
14-16, 19-20, 22) He married in June 1995 and has two sons, ages 16 and 13. 
Applicant’s wife is employed full-time as a registered nurse. Applicant has not served 
in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 17, 23-24, 58) 
 
Drug Involvement/Personal Conduct 
 
 The underlying basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from his 
self-disclosure and is not disputed. His past drug use consists of: (1) from 
approximately June 1986 to July 2012, Applicant illegally purchased and used 
marijuana, with varying frequency; and (2) from approximately February 2011 to July 
2012, Applicant illegally purchased and used synthetic marijuana (spice or incense), 
with varying frequency.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d) Applicant reported in detail the 
circumstances of his past drug use during his January 16, 2013 Office of Personnel 
 
3 
 
 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) and during his testimony. (GE 2; 
Tr. 26-25, 33-37, 39-42, 49-52) 
 
 Applicant has never been arrested as a result of his past involvement with 
drugs. He was introduced to marijuana when he about 13 years old by his older 
cousin. Applicant’s drug use occurred, “most all the time at home and mostly by 
myself.” Applicant quit using drugs in July 2012 and cited three reasons for doing so –  
his wife’s strong disapproval, the adverse influence his behavior would have on his 
sons, and his faith as a Christian. (Tr. 25-30, 42-45, 48, 53-56) Applicant has severed 
contact with drug-using associates and contacts. (Tr. 33, 45-48)  
 
Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent dated May 20, 2015, with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any drug violation. (AE G; Tr. 37-38, 48) He 
concluded his testimony by stating that he grew up late in life, “righted the ship,” has 
not had anything to do with drugs since 2012, and would never do anything to betray 
his country. (Tr. 38-39) 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a drug and alcohol evaluation from a duly 
qualified licensed marriage and family therapist (LMFT), psychotherapist, with 
significant experience in substance abuse issues. The LMFT stated “[Applicant] is in 
full-sustained remission from substance use. [Applicant] has a strong support 
community and is motivated to continue to not use substances because he wants to 
model positive behavior for his children and be successful in his chosen career. There 
are no recommendations for treatment or other counseling.” (AE H – AE I) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Seven witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf -- his wife, two long-time family 
friends, his pastor, his supervisor, and two colleagues from work. It is clear that 
Applicant has an engaged and concerned support group. (Tr. 57-64, 86-101)  
 
The company employees who testified on Applicant’s behalf all hold security 
clearances. Applicant recognizes his mistakes and has put his drug use behind him. 
Drug use is not tolerated in their company and any use would be grounds for 
termination. Applicant is a trusted, well-liked, and productive employee. (Tr. 64-85) 
Applicant’s 2013 and 2014 work performance evaluations document above average 
performance and an employee who is making a significant contribution to his company 
and the national defense. (AE A – AE B) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
4 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. He fully disclosed his drug abuse in his SOR 
response and at his hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 and AG 
¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation form drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
                                                          
1
 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
6 
 
 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was July 2012, about 22 months 
before his hearing. His illegal drug use ended when he realized that he needed to turn 
his life around. The absence of evidence of more recent or extensive drug use, and 
his promise not to use illegal drugs in the future as well as his recent favorable drug 
and alcohol assessment eliminates doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. With maturity, and having sought professional help, he has 
broken or reduced the prevalence of his patterns of drug abuse, and he has changed 
his life with respect to illegal drug use. He has abstained from drug abuse for about 22 
months and has had no problem in doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
The testimony from senior company representatives show Applicant’s work 
behavior has not been indicative of his having a drug problem. He is viewed as a 
valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the 
defense industry is supported by senior company officials, who know him personally 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on 
the absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
3
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
7 
 
 
and professionally, and by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his 
hearing, Applicant acknowledged that drug abuse is incompatible with his future 
career and family plans. He expressed a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle 
changes consistent with total abstinence of marijuana or any other drugs. I find for 
Applicant under this concern. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
           This concern was cross-alleged under drug involvement concerns. No new 
facts other than those discussed under drug involvement were brought to light during 
the hearing. Accordingly, the facts and analysis under drug involvement are 
incorporated under this section. Utilizing the rationale under the drug involvement 
section, I find for Applicant under this concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline H is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
additional comments are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employer, family, and friends support him. His 
employment history to date is indicative of stability and a strong work ethic. This 
support and self-introspection should ensure his continued success. Applicant 
demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to remaining drug free. 
Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from his 
mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. I find Applicant has 
presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
8 
 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration 
of the whole-person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  For Applicant 
 
           Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                          
4
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
