 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX    )  ADP Case No. 14-02822 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robert Akouri, Esq. 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). His eligibility to occupy a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions version of an application for a public trust position (SF 86). (Item 3) On August 
1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD 
was unable to find that it is consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive 
information. (Item 1) The DOD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
determine whether access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations by an undated answer, and he did 
not request a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated December 29, 2014, was provided to him on January 16, 2015.1 After receipt of 
the FORM, Applicant retained counsel and through counsel Applicant submitted 
information within the 30-day time period after receipt of the FORM. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s post-FORM submissions. The case was assigned 
to me on March 30, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR Answer, Applicant admitted and denied in part the allegations 
contained in SOR ¶ 1.a, and admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b 
and incorporated his answer to SOR ¶ 1.a to SOR ¶ 2.c.  He also provided mitigating 
information. (Item 2) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old application developer employed by a defense 
contractor since January. He graduated from high school in June 1976, and attended 
college from September 1976 to March 1985, but did not graduate. Applicant married in 
October 1993, and has a 19-year-old son and a 17-year-old daughter. He has never 
served in the military. There is no evidence of felony or misdemeanor charges or 
alcohol abuse. There is no evidence of security or rule violations. (Items 3, 4) 
 
Drug Involvement/Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges that he used and purchased marijuana twice a week 
from 1985 to 2011. In his SOR answer, he disputes that characterization of his 
marijuana use. Applicant asserts that during his March 20, 2013 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he told the investigator that he 
used marijuana two times a week off and on. (SOR ¶ 1.a; Items 2, 4) 
 
During his OPM PSI, Applicant claims that he stopped using marijuana in 
January 2011 at his wife’s request because it was illegal. On his own initiative, he 
sought drug treatment for his marijuana usage from October 2010 to January 2011. 
(Item 4) In his SOR answer, Applicant provided documentation from the drug treatment 
clinic that he was initially assessed on July 17, 2010, and subsequently attended nine 
personal counseling sessions with his last session on November 13, 2010. (Item 2) In 
his SOR answer, Applicant stated that he was “off” marijuana until 2014 when he was 
issued a medical marijuana card on January 28, 2014 with an expiration date of 
                                            
1
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated January 6, 2015, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated January 16, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
February 1, 2016. He did not indicate how frequently he has used marijuana since 
2014. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he falsified his February 2013 
SF 86 when asked in the preceding seven years whether he illegally used any drugs or 
controlled substances and whether he had been involved in the illegal purchase, 
receiving, handling or sale of any drug or controlled substance.  (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.c; Item 
2) Applicant explained, “I further state that at the time I was embarrassed of what I was 
doing, that prior to my interview I actually attempted to stop (Please see attached) 
succeeded for over 3 years, was still having difficulty, sought treatment and procured a 
medical marijuana card (Please see attached).” (Item 2) 
 
Applicant’s counsel stated, among other things, that Applicant’s employer and 
family support him, that he is a person of good moral character, and a loving husband 
and father to his wife and two children. He further stated that Applicant has no intention 
of using marijuana in the future. (FORM response) Applicant did not submit any primary 
source character evidence. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
                                                  
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two of those drug involvement disqualifying 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
conditions are applicable in this case: “(a) any drug abuse;” and “(c) illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, or sale or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”2 The Government established its 
case through Applicant’s admissions and the evidence presented.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
None of the drug involvement mitigating conditions are fully applicable. All of 
Applicant’s marijuana use and purchases before receiving his January 2014 medical 
marijuana card were both illegal under state and federal drug laws. Despite his medical 
marijuana card, Applicant’s marijuana use remains illegal under federal drug laws. Apart 
from Applicant’s assertion through counsel in his FORM response, there is no evidence 
that Applicant intends to cease his marijuana use. Applicant did not provide an 
explanation for obtaining his medical marijuana card. Lastly, there is no evidence that 
Applicant has disassociated himself from drug-using associates and contacts. 
                                            
2
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
            AG ¶ 16 describes seven personal conduct concerns that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. One of those disqualifying conditions is applicable in 
this case:  
 
(a)deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personal security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
The Government established this condition through Applicant’s admissions and 
the evidence presented.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven potential conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Embarrassment does not constitute 
sufficient grounds to deliberately lie when completing an SF 86.3 Applicant’s 
falsifications were recent and material. The security application process does not make 
allowances for anything other than truthful and complete answers. 
 
Applicant’s concealment of relevant and material information demonstrates a lack 
of candor required of cleared personnel. Applicants are expected to give full and frank 
answers during the clearance process. The Government has an interest in examining all 
relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before making a clearance 
decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse 
information in a timely fashion, not when they perceive disclosure to be prudent or 
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about 
himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security 
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on 
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. 
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate 
Government interest. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                            
3
Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application may violate 18 
U.S.C. § 1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
(1995) as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision 
making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 
2004). If Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance applications, his accurate 
answers are capable of influencing the Government to deny his security clearance. Making a false 
statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes 
confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). My comments in the Analysis 
section are incorporated in the whole-person discussion. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his 
service as a defense contractor. Apart from his statements of remorse, he provided 
limited evidence corroborating rehabilitation. If other favorable evidence exists, 
Applicant did not provide it. A 26-year history of intermittent drug use and relatively 
recent falsification about that drug use is inconsistent with the standards required of 
those entrusted with holding a public trust position. A trustworthiness adjudication is 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Lastly, in requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on 
the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the security concerns. By failing to 
provide such information, and in relying on only several uncorroborated limited 
paragraphs of explanations, security concerns remain.  
   
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c: Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
