KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Based on the record that was before her, the Judge’s reliance on Applicant’s
inconsistent statements was supportable.  There is no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility
determination.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03069.a1
DATE: 07/30/2015
DATE: July 30, 2015
In Re:
-----------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03069
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
30, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On May 22, 2015, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether Judge erred in her credibility
determination;  whether the Judge erred in finding that Applicant had deliberately omitted
information from his security clearance application (SCA); and whether the Judge’s adverse decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Federal contractor and is seeking a security clearance for the first time. 
He owes 17 delinquent debts, totaling $30,000, the majority of which are for medical expenses. 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from a period of unemployment, followed by about 2 years
of underemployment during which he did not have adequate medical insurance.  In addition,
Applicant’s wife’s business suffered during an economic downturn.  He and his wife consulted a
bankruptcy attorney; however, they decided to sell off assets and draw down their retirement
accounts to pay their debts.  In completing his SCA, Applicant did not disclose any derogatory
information about his finances.  In his answer to the SOR, he claimed that he had mistakenly
submitted his SCA before he had provided financial input.  He claimed that he advised his human
resources manager about this problem.  He also claimed that, at the beginning of his clearance
interview, he told the investigator that he had accidentally submitted an incomplete SCA before
being confronted with information about his debts.  The interview summary presented Applicant as
stating he did not list his delinquent debts because he had not been in contact with his creditors and
was not aware of the debts.  He told the investigator that he had some delinquent accounts but was
not able to recall all of them.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge acknowledged that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances
outside his control.  However, she concluded that he had not acted responsibly in regard to his debts,
citing to evidence that he has held steady employment since 2011 but has made little effort to pay
his creditors.  Moreover, she found no evidence that Applicant had received financial counseling. 
The Judge found that Applicant’s omission of his delinquent debts from the SOR was deliberate,
noting inconsistencies between his SOR Answer and his statements during his interview. 
Characterizing the version in the SOR Answer as “an elaborate story,” the Judge stated that
Applicant had not provided corroboration for this account.  Decision at 5.  She concluded that these
inconsistent statements undermined Applicant’s credibility.  She stated that this omission, and
Applicant’s failure to take responsibility for it, raised unresolved concerns about his security
worthiness.
Discussion
In pressing his arguments on appeal, Applicant includes matters from outside the record.  We
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant challenges the Judge’s
credibility determination, arguing that the record supports his explanation that his omission was
purely accidental.  We give deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
Inconsistent statements can form the basis of a negative assessment of a witness’s credibility.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00609 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).   Based on the record that was before
her, the Judge’s reliance on Applicant’s inconsistent statements was supportable.  We find no reason
to disturb the Judge’s credibility determination.  Insofar as Applicant’s argument challenges the
Judge’s finding about the deliberate nature of his omission, we conclude that the Judge properly
evaluated Applicant’s intent in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-14265
at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2013).  We find no error in the challenged finding.
Applicant cites to evidence that he argues is favorable to him, including statements in the
interview summary to the effect that he is meeting his financial obligations and that there is nothing
in his background for which he could be blackmailed or coerced.  However, these comments
summarize Applicant’s answers to the interviewer.  They do not constitute the interviewer’s
considered opinion as to Applicant’s worthiness for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02447
at 6 (App. Bd. Feb. 26, 2015).  In any event, even if an investigator provided such an opinion it
would not bind the DoD in its evaluation of an applicant’s case.  Applicant also cites to evidence
that he considered bankruptcy but decided instead to resolve his debts in what he termed a
responsible manner.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence, nor is his argument sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00723 at 3 (App. Bd.
Feb. 4, 2014).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  Promises to resolve debts in the future are not
a substitute for a track record of debt resolution.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05390 at 2 (App. Bd.
Oct. 22, 2010).  Refusal to provide truthful answers to officials during the security clearance process
“will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action[.]”  Directive ¶ 15(b).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See  also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
