KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A party alleging bias has a heavy burden of persuasion.  A jusge has no authority to
promise a clearance nor is that how the Board understands the cited colloquy.  Adverse decision
affirmed
CASENO: 14-04664.a1
DATE: 07/24/2015
DATE: July 24, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04664
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 20, 2014,, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 11, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge denied Applicant due
process; whether the Judge was biased against Applicant; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military, from which he retired in 2007.  In addition to his
retirement pay, he receives disability pay from the VA.  After retiring from the military, Applicant
took a job with a Defense contractor.  Applicant’s wife has not been able to find suitable
employment.  
Applicant bought a house for over $290,000, financing the entire purchase with a mortgage. 
Shortly thereafter, the real estate market crashed, and Applicant’s house was worth less than the
balance of his loan.  At the same time, Applicant was experiencing financial difficulties due to his
paying for the education of his three children.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges the past-due amount on the mortgage loan, plus four other
delinquent debts.  Two of these four are duplicates of each other.  In late 2012, Applicant retained
a law firm to assist him in resolving his mortgage problem.  On this attorney’s advice, Applicant
stopped making payments on the loan while the attorney negotiated a short-sale.  This did not
succeed, and the home was sold in a foreclosure sale, resulting in a deficiency, although there is no
indication that the lender is seeking to recoup this debt.  
Applicant also has a credit card debt in excess of $25,000.  He states that he has entered into
a payment plan, although he was unable to make some of the payments.  When he finally succeeded
in contacting the creditor, he was told the debt had been charged off and sold to a collection
company, with whom he would have to deal.  He produced an agreement to settle the debt for about
$8,800.  
Other SOR debts include one owed to a bank.  Applicant admits that the account is his, but
he denies that the account has a balance.  Applicant believes that he may have been a victim of
identity theft.  He also denied another debt alleged to be owed to a collection company.  When asked
about these two debts during his clearance interview, he stated that he would pay them if he
determined that they were valid.  He sent dispute letters to the credit reporting agencies about two
weeks after the hearing.
2
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for loyalty, dedication, trustworthiness, leadership, and
reliability.  His references recommend that he be granted a clearance.
The Judge’s Analysis
As stated above, the Judge concluded that one of the SOR debts was a duplicate of another
one.  However, he found that Applicant’s presentation regarding the $25,000 credit card debt
amounted simply to a promise for future debt resolution, which the Judge concluded was not
sufficient to show responsible action or that Applicant had made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. 
He stated that Applicant’s ongoing financial problems “continue to cast doubt on his current
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.”  Decision at 7.  
Discussion
 Applicant cites to language in the Judge’s decision to the effect that Applicant’s debts are
not in control.1   Applicant argues that this is merely conjectural and shows that the Judge was biased
against him.  A party who alleges that a Judge is biased has a “heavy burden of persuasion.”  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02207 at 2 (App. Bd. May 27, 2015).  We have examined the transcript, the
Judge’s decision, and the entirety of the record.  We find nothing therein that would likely persuade
a reasonable person that the Judge lacked the requisite impartiality.  The challenged comment by
the Judge was consistent with the record that was before him, given the ongoing nature of
Applicant’s debts and Applicant’s dilatory efforts at disputing and/or resolving them.
Applicant notes that the Judge held the record open for him to submit additional evidence,
including evidence that he had disputed some of the debts.  He submitted evidence that he had
disputed the debts in question by sending letters to the credit reporting agencies.  He argues that he
did what the Judge required of him, which should have been enough to mitigate the security
concerns in his case.  We have examined the record, particularly the portions of the transcript that
Applicant has cited.  The Judge stated to Applicant that the credit reports contained evidence that
he owed debts to certain banks, placing on Applicant the burden of providing evidence to the
contrary.  “[T]hey’re enough to show that you owed them money.  Once they do that, it’s up to you
to prove that you don’t.”  Tr. at 63.  Although the Judge advised Applicant that he had no legal
obligation to do anything, if he requested extra time to provide evidence concerning his claim to
have been a victim of identity theft, or that he otherwise did not owe the debts, the Judge would
grant it.  At the end of the hearing, the Judge held the record open for more than a month.  Tr. at 67. 
Applicant submitted copies of letters he had written to credit reporting companies asserting that he
did not owe the debts and demanding that they be removed form his reports.  Applicant Exhibit F. 
He contends that he provided the evidence that the Judge needed and, therefore, should have been
granted a clearance.
1“I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith
effort to pay his debts.  His finances are not yet under control.”  Decision at 7.  
3
A Judge has no authority to promise an applicant a clearance, especially when he has not
received all of the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06602 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2011).  In
this case, however, we do not interpret the Judge’s colloquy with Applicant to constitute such a
promise.  Rather, noting Applicant’s testimony that he believed certain debts to be the result of
identity theft, he gave Applicant extra time in which to provide evidence in support.  He said nothing
that would likely persuade a reasonable person that he was specifying the quantum of evidence
sufficient to meet Applicant’s burden of persuasion.  Neither did he say anything that would likely
persuade a reasonable person that such evidence as Applicant actually submitted–letters demanding
removal of the debts from his reports but with nothing other than his own assertions on the issue of
the debts’ legitimacy–would support a favorable decision. 
Applicant cites to his favorable evidence, including his service to the U.S. and his having
held a clearance for many years without incident or concern.  This was evidence that the Judge was
required to consider, along with all the other evidence in the record.  However, Applicant’s brief is
not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  Nor is it
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00321 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2015).  
     
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody                    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
