1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05268
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On November 21, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2015. A notice of
hearing was issued on April 23, 2015, scheduling the hearing for June 18, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2  were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-H, which were admitted without
objection. The transcript was received on June 26, 2015.  Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
At the hearing, Counsel withdrew allegation 2.b under Guideline E.      1
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F and Guideline E, and provided explanations. 
Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school and attended college.
He served in  the United States Army from 2000 until 2005, and received an honorable
discharge. Applicant is married and has four children. Applicant has held a security
clearance since his time in the military. He has been employed with his current
employer since August 2014. (GX 1)
The SOR alleges violation of company policy concerning abuse of a corporate
credit card in 2008 and 2010 (SOR 1.a, 1.b) The allegations are cross referenced under
Guideline E (SOR 2.a).  Applicant readily admits that is the case.1
In about April 2008, Applicant used his corporate credit card for personal use on
various occasions. He acknowledged that he intentionally used the card for paying his
private bills, buying things, and home remodeling. Applicant explained that he would
pay a large monthly amount when the monthly bill arrived. In June 2008, Applicant
became 90 days past due on his corporate card. (AX E) At the time, Applicant was a
security officer. Applicant received a written warning from the company manager. (AX
F) Applicant was explicitly warned that this lapse in judgment could have major
repercussions for his ability to maintain his security clearance. He was advised that any
further lapses of this nature would be grounds for disciplinary action, which could
include termination. (AX F)
Applicant temporarily ceased using his corporate card for personal use for about
one year, but in 2010, he resumed using the corporate card for his own use. He
amassed approximately $11,000 to $14,000 of personal charges on the corporate credit
card. When he failed to make the requisite payment, his employer was notified.
Applicant’s card was cancelled.  Applicant was asked to resign from the company,
which he did in December 2010.(GX 2)
Applicant admitted at the hearing that he was ashamed of his behavior. (Tr. 13)
He explained that in 2011, he entered into an agreement with his company to repay the
entire amount that was wrongly charged on the corporate card. He paid a monthly
amount of $481.28. In March 2013, Applicant made his final payment of $481.10 and
resolved the obligation. The total amount that he repaid to the company was
$11,550.54. (AX G and H)
Applicant submitted his security clearance applications that he has completed
since 2011. He emphasized that he has disclosed the abuse of the corporate credit
card and his resignation in 2010. He accepts full responsibility for his actions. (Tr. 17)
Applicant completed three security clearance applications since 2011 and was denied a
3
position because of his disclosure. However, he was approved for a position of public
trust in 2012. (AX C)
Applicant admitted it was stupid and selfish behavior. He did not make excuses.
He stated that he foolishly believed he could pay the entire bill each month. He does
not offer that as an excuse or justification. (Tr. 31) Applicant realizes that this was a
huge wake-up call that something was wrong in his life. At the time that Applicant
abused the corporate credit card, he earned about $55,000 a year.  
Applicant discussed the situation with his wife. He knew he had a problem with
shopping and buying things that he did not need. He now avoids “triggers” that would
create a problem. (Tr. 55) He also admitted that he had his personal credit card at the
maximum credit amount. He knows he made poor financial choices. (Tr. 48) Applicant
has fully disclosed this abuse of the corporate credit card in detail in subsequent
security clearance applications. 
Applicant told his current employer that he did not want a corporate credit card.
He does not believe he would abuse such a privilege, but he learned a harsh lesson.
He has made a point to tell others about his situation. He wants this to serve as a
learning tool, especially with younger people. (Tr. 50) He offered that he has had the
opportunity to look at himself and see that he did not handle the financial and corporate
card issue appropriately. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
5
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
In this case AG ¶ 16 (c) applies. Applicant is a seasoned employee who has held
a security clearance. The facts alleged under Guideline F are the same as under
Guideline E.
Applicant’s explanations  persuade me that he is reliable, trustworthy and  has
met his burden to mitigate the personal conduct concerns based on the same reasons
that he has mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.
Applicant has  mitigated the personal conduct concerns under Guideline E. The
mitigating conditions that are applicable in this case are 17(c) and 17(d).
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.”
Applicant admitted that he abused the policy for his corporate credit card in
2008, and was given a written warning. However, he again abused the privilege and
was past-due on the account in 2010. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee
theft, fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan
statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust) applies. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
Applicant’s financial decisions are not recent.  Applicant’s abuse of his corporate
credit card occurred in 2008 and 2010. He resigned from the company. He has chosen
6
not to obtain another card from his new employer. He has accepted full responsibility
for his actions. He disclosed the information on all subsequent security clearance
applications. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG
¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies in part. The facts in this case do not allow for this mitigating condition. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has application. Applicant as noted above
immediately took steps to repay the company for the entire amount that he owed on the
corporate card. He fulfilled his obligation in 2013. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications
that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 37 years old.  He served in the military. He is an educated man. He violated
company policy concerning his corporate credit card. He was warned in 2008, but
relapsed in 2010. He made monthly payments but in 2010 he was past due on a
monthly bill. He resigned from the company. Since then he has disclosed on at least
7
three security clearance applications his violation and abuse of policy regarding the
corporate credit card. He also immediately signed an agreement with the company to
make monthly payments to resolve the financial obligation. He completed his payment
in full in 2013. He realizes how stupid and selfish his actions were. He is ashamed of
his behavior. He now tries to mentor young people concerning finances and the issue of
having a corporate credit card. I found him candid and sincere in his testimony that he
has learned a harsh lesson. He has examined his motivations and realizes that he had
a problem. He has persuaded me that there are clear indications that his problem has
been resolved. He has held a security clearance for many years. He stated that this
would never occur again. 
Applicant  provided sufficient information concerning his current judgment and
reliability. He has mitigated the security concerns under the financial and personal
conduct guidelines.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: WITHDRAWN
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
