 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-05798 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On February 16, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR with explanations. On 
April 2, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On April 
8, 2015, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 22, 2015, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing 
for May 27, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, 
and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were received into evidence 
without objection. On June 4, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old aviation sheet metal mechanic employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2013. He seeks a secret security clearance as a 
condition of his continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 12-14)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1972, and after high school he 
took “about a semester” of community college courses. (Tr. 18, 39-40) He served in 
the U.S. Air Force from May 1972 to December 1975, and was honorably discharged 
as a sergeant (pay grade E-4). (GE 1; Tr. 13, 18)  
 
Applicant was previously married from August 1978 to May 1981, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in January 2010. He has an adult son and 
daughter from his first marriage and an adult stepdaughter from his second marriage. 
Applicant’s wife is employed as a full-time registered nurse at a dialysis center. (GE 1; 
Tr. 14-16, 19, 38, 43-44) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 16 debts – 10 collection accounts, 5 past-due accounts, 
and 1 judgment, totaling $67,164.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.q)  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when he was permanently laid off from a 
plant where he worked from October 1981 to January 2011. During his almost 30-year 
career at the plant, he was laid off “six to seven times” and had to file for 
unemployment. Applicant was unemployed for 15 months before he found his present 
 
3 
 
 
job. Without a steady income for 15 months, Applicant fell behind on his debts. (GE 1; 
Tr. 20-27, 31-36) 
 
To address the debts, Applicant contacted a bankruptcy attorney and filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. On February 24, 2015, Applicant filed his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. On May 13, 2015, Applicant’s Chapter 13 petition was approved 
and a confirmation order was issued. His Summary of Schedules lists $74,466 in 
liabilities. All of the SOR debts were addressed in the bankruptcy petition and order. 
Applicant completed financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. The terms 
of the order require Applicant to pay $410 per month to the Chapter 13 Trustee for 60 
months. As of the hearing date, Applicant had made three payments to the Trustee. 
(AE A – AE E; Tr. 27-30, 34-38, 40-41) 
 
Applicant has no debts apart from than those included in his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. He is current on his federal and state income taxes. (Tr. 38-39) After 
Applicant pays his monthly bills to include his bankruptcy payment, his net monthly 
remainder is “$1,000 to $1,500.” (AE E; Tr. 57) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted a reference letter from his former supervisor. His former 
supervisor stated that Applicant was an excellent worker, punctual, and trustworthy. 
(AE F) 
 
Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf – his wife, a fellow church 
member, who has known Applicant for 10 years, and a former co-worker and fellow 
church member, who has known Applicant for 20 years. The witnesses provided 
favorable testimony about Applicant’s character, work ethic, and trustworthiness. (Tr. 
42-70) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant was permanently laid off 
from a plant after a 30-year career and was unemployed for 15 months. During that 
30-year career, he experienced five to six layoffs. He struggled to find a job and fell 
behind on his debts. These layoffs as well as being permanently being laid off could 
not be anticipated. Applicant initially remained in contact with his creditors, but 
reached a point where he simply did not have the money to pay them. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are fully applicable. Applicant took a financial counseling 
course as part of the Chapter 13 bankruptcy process and his finances are under 
control. Rather than file Chapter 7 bankruptcy, he chose to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
and is repaying his creditors. As of his hearing date, he had made three payments to 
the Trustee. Having heard his testimony, as well as the testimony of his wife, this 
process has made a substantial impression on Applicant. He conveyed that he is 
determined to follow through on his payments and not jeopardize his security 
clearance.1  AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep her debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s 41 months of honorable service in the Air Force, his 30-year career 
with his previous employer, and current employment with a defense contractor weighs 
heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. 
He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts 
have been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts are being paid through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy process.  
Due to circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite his 
financial setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is on the road to a full 
financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his reference letter, 
his testimony and demeanor, and the testimony of his witnesses. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
