The Government submitted five items for the record.      1
1
.                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)      ISCR Case No. 14-04604
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Greg A. Cervi,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On November 25, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015.  Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated June 30, 2015 . Applicant1
received the FORM on June 1, 2015. Applicant submitted documentation in response to
2
the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations under
Guideline F (financial considerations) with explanations. (Item 1)
Applicant is 45 years old. He served in the United States Marine Corps (USMC)
from 1988 to 1997. He received his associate’s degree in 2007. Applicant is married
and has two children. He has been employed with his current employer since April
2008. (Item 3) He has held a security clearance since 1988.
The SOR alleges five collection accounts, including a delinquent mortgage loan
account, totaling approximately $145,000. He disclosed his delinquent account on his
security clearance application. (Item 3)
Applicant cites job loss, reduction in pay, and medical issues as the reason for
the delinquent accounts. Before 2008, he had no financial difficulties. His credit report
confirms his claim. (Item 4)
As to the allegation in SOR 1.a, a settlement occurred in 2012, which involved
paying $200 a month. Applicant provided documentation that the account is current and
in good standing. As of June 8, 2015, the balance was $1,640 (reduced from over
$10,000). Applicant attempted a hardship loan but he was not successful. (Response to
FORM)
The collection account alleged in SOR 1.b for $39,764 became delinquent in
2009. Again Applicant attempted to establish a hardship agreement, but was
unsuccessful. Applicant settled the account in 2013, and agreed to pay $150 a month
until the balance was paid in full. He provided documentation that $150 has been
automatically deducted each month and that the balance, as of June 2015, was
$36,385.
Applicant provided documentation that his home mortgage loan is current and in
good standing. Applicant obtained a loan modification in 2014. The first payment was
made in December 2014. The delinquent account in SOR 1.c for $65,455 was
addressed and the account is current. Applicant provided documentation that the
monthly mortgage amount of $3,634.01 was paid in June 2015. The statement shows
that the account is not past due. It also reflects that $18,257.93 has been paid year to
date. (Response to FORM)
As to SOR 1.d, a collection account in the amount of $6,204, Applicant admits
that it was charged off in 2009. This was his wife’s credit card account and he was a
secondary user. His wife sent a letter in 2009 advising that she was not disputing the
debt, but due to the financial hardship she could not make the full payment amount.
3
Applicant’s wife offered to make monthly $25 payments. The check was attached and is
in the file. The company did not accept the offer. In his response to FORM, Applicant
states that the debt expired in 2013, and he is not legally liable for it. He attached the
applicable state civil law concerning the issues. (Response to FORM)
As for the collection account in SOR 1.e, Applicant states that this was a credit
union debt for a line of credit. He could not make the $707 monthly payment due to his
decrease in pay and hospitalization of his daughter. He agreed to terminate his
membership in the union. Applicant paid two other outstanding debts in 2012. He has
another account with the credit union that he is paying as agreed, which is not reflected
in the SOR.  His 2015 credit bureau report confirms that another account with the same
credit union is in good status. Applicant’s credit bureau report clearly reflects accounts
that are in good standing. Applicant provided documentation that in 2009, he wrote to
the credit union and asked for an opportunity to modify his payment. He also sent a
check for $25 in good faith. Applicant disclosed this information on his security
clearance application. (Item 3)
Applicant has resolved many accounts that became delinquent due to his job
loss in 2008 and reduction in pay. He worked with his creditors and managed to retain
his home by modifying the mortgage loan.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security5
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any6
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to7
deny an individual a security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an
applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a
clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
5
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.”
Applicant admitted that he incurred delinquent debt. His credit reports confirm
delinquent debts.  Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC
DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.  With such conditions raised, it is left
to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant’s delinquent debts are not recent and occurred when he lost his
employment. His credit reports confirm that before 2008, he had no financial difficulties.
Applicant addressed all his debts. He did not ignore his creditors. He was proactive and
arranged for plans and told creditors about his hardship. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
also applies. Applicant presented sufficient documentation that he has acted
responsibly to resolve his debts since 2008.   
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has application.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) also applies. The
SOR debts have been addressed, and non SOR-debts have been paid as well.
Applicant presented evidence that he has consistently made his monthly payments on
his payment plans. He is current with the payments.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 45 years old. He served in the military. He is married and has children. He
was employed for many years with one company until a reduction in force in 2008. He
has held a security clearance for many years.
Applicant provided information on accounts that he has addressed. He also
disclosed all his financial issues on his security clearance application. He was pro
active in dealing with the delinquent debts, large to small. He is current and is paying as
agreed on his accounts. By civil law he is not legally liable for the debts in 1.d and 1.e.
Normally, this is not a reason for mitigation, but in light of all his efforts and the whole-
person, he has presented sufficient documentation to mitigate his case. I have no
doubts about his judgment and reliability. Applicant  mitigated the Government’s case
concerning the financial considerations security concerns.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
