 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05676 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 17, 2012, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP). On January 15, 2015, the Department of Defense issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 23, 2015. Applicant admitted 
all six allegations. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing.  
 
On May 4, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was 
provided to the Applicant on May 15, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on May 26, 2015. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 
30 day time allowed that would have expired on June 25, 2015. Department Counsel 
did not object to the admission of these documents and I admitted them into the record. 
I received the case assignment on July 14, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations and attached two documents in support of 
the Answer. The Response contained the same answers to the allegations, and 
additional documents. (Item 1; Response)  
 
 Applicant is a 45 year old employee of a defense contractor. He is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen since 1997. He and his first wife divorced in 2006 and had the marital debts 
assigned to his name. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2007 on those debts of about 
$12,000 (Subparagraph 1.f), and his debts was discharged that year. Applicant later 
remarried. (Items 2, 6) 
 
 Applicant owes five delinquent debts totaling $74,466. The other listed debts 
started in 2007 or later and remain unpaid. (Items 2-4, 6) 
 
 Applicant owes $55,035 in arrearages on his home mortgage (Subparagraph 
1.a). He submitted a statement from a law firm that he is attempting to obtain a loan 
modification to lower his monthly payments from $1,900. The letter is dated January 19, 
2015, but no updated information was provided. This debt remains unresolved. (Items 
2-4; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes $1,900 on a loan originally owed to a bank and now being 
collected by a debt collector (Subparagraph 1.b). Applicant submitted an installment 
payment agreement for $123.42 monthly starting in July 2015 until June 2016. He also 
sent copies of his checking account showing two payments were made in June 2015. 
This debt is being resolved. (Items 2-4; Response) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant owes $67 on a medical account dating from 2011 (Subparagraph 1.c). 
Applicant did not address this debt in his Answer or Response with proof of payment. 
His Answer declared he would pay the debt, but beyond making that statement 
Applicant did not offer any proof of payment. This debt is unresolved. (Items 2-4) 
  
 Applicant owes $1,899 to a bank (Subparagraph 1.d). Applicant pays this debt on 
an installment payment agreement. He made two payments: $118.73 on June 4, 2015; 
and $300 on June 5, 2015. This debt is being resolved. (Items 2-4; Response)  
 Applicant owed a time share developer $15,565 on a unit he purchased 
(Subparagraph 1.e). He enclosed a letter from the creditor/developer with his Answer in 
which the creditor/developer proposed to accept ownership of the unit in full satisfaction 
of the debt. This letter is dated December 2011. This debt is resolved by this method. 
(Items 2-4; Answer) 
  
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 
4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on May 14, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as his own 
statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report 
of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In 
light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2007 to the present, Applicant accumulated five delinquent debts, totaling 
$74,466 that remained unpaid or unresolved. He also filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on 
earlier debts in 2007. 
  
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because Applicant entered two installment payment 
agreements with creditors to repay those debts. He hired an attorney to modify his 
home loan, but he did not submit any current proof that any action has been taken to 
accomplish that goal. He resolved his time share debt by ceding the property back to 
the developer pursuant to an agreement the developer proposed. His 2007 bankruptcy 
is in the past and is a legitimate method to resolve debts. The real issue is that he filed 
bankruptcy once and then continues to compile debts. However, he is trying to resolve 
his current debt situation short of filing another bankruptcy. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on his delinquent debts during 
the past seven years. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
