1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-01813
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s good-faith efforts to satisfy his delinquent debts are sufficient to
mitigate the security concerns. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006.
 On January 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting the allegations and
requesting a hearing; whereupon the case was assigned to me on April 2, 2015. The
Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of
2
 
hearing on April 14, 2015, scheduling the hearing for May 13, 2015. The hearing was
held as scheduled. At the hearing, I received three Government exhibits (GEs 1 through
3), and three Applicant exhibits (AEs A through C), together with Applicant’s testimony.
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant the opportunity to
submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted an additional exhibit
that I incorporated into the record as AE D. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May
20, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old single man. He is a high school graduate. For the past
12 years, Applicant has held various janitorial jobs. Since 2013, he has worked as a
janitor on a military base. (Tr. 14) Applicant has taken some online trade school courses
to learn medical billing, in an attempt “to better [him]self,” but stopped, as the course
load became increasingly challenging and conflicted with his work schedule. (Tr. 21)
In June 2012, Applicant was fired after being accused of sexually harassing a
coworker. (Tr. 24) Unable to make ends meet, he subsequently became homeless. (AE
1 at 8) He lived in a homeless shelter for approximately a year until May 2013, when he
obtained his current job. (GE 1 at 7) Currently, he lives in transitional housing and is
working with a social worker to find a long-term rental unit. (Tr. 17) His monthly rent
payments total $528 per month. (Tr. 19)
While unemployed, Applicant’s student loan debts became delinquent (SOR
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c, and 1.g). Also, Applicant fell behind on bills owed to a
car leasing company (SOR subparagraph 1.d), a credit card company (SOR
subparagraph 1.f), a cell phone company (SOR subparagraph 1.h), and a collection
agent for a medical account (SOR subparagraph 1.i). 
Applicant’s student loan accounts collectively total $20,000, which include
approximately $4,000 in penalties and fees. (AE A;  Tr. 22-23) On April 27, 2015,
Applicant arranged to repay the student loan debt through $173 monthly payments. By
June 1, 2015, Applicant had made his first $173 payment through twice-monthly
increments of $86.50. (AE D at 4,7)
Applicant contacted the creditor listed in subparagraph 1.d in April 2015. He
agreed to pay the $2,943 balance in $30 twice-monthly payments. (AE C) As of June
2015, he has been paying this creditor, as agreed. (AE D at 4,7)
The debt listed in subparagraph 1.d, totalling $600, has been assigned to another
creditor. (AE B) On May 2, 2015, Applicant arranged to pay this debt through twice-
monthly automatic drafts totalling $50. (AE B) As of June 2015, he has been making
payments, as scheduled. (AE D at 4,7)
Applicant has not yet contacted the creditors listed in subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i.
These debts total approximately $1,000. Applicant earns approximately $17,500 per
3
 
year. (Tr. 20) He lives “paycheck to paycheck,” and cannot afford to make payments on
these debts with what he is already committed to paying. (Tr. 20, 26)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Between 2012 and 2013, Applicant fell behind on his debts totalling more
than $20,000. These debts remain outstanding. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by the loss of his job. However, he
was not laid off; he was fired for cause. Consequently, the circumstances surrounding
the financial problems were not beyond his control. Nevertheless, Applicant has been
taking steps to improve his situation, working with a social worker to find stable, long-
term housing, contacting creditors, arranging payment plans, and making payments
according to terms acceptable to his creditors.
Relative to the balance of the debts, Applicant’s payments are small. Moreover,
Applicant just started making payments within the past two months. Conversely, he is
paying what he can afford, and his efforts appear to be well-organized. I conclude that
4
 
AG ¶¶ 20( c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” and
20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” apply.
    
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s financial problems did not occur as a result of profligate spending.
Moreover, although his progress to rectify his delinquencies has been minimal in
comparison to the amount of debt that he has incurred, he is doing the best that he can,
given his limited financial means. Under these circumstances, I conclude that Applicant
has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
5
 
