Applicant’s middle names were mistakenly merged and misspelled in the original SOR. The SOR heading1
was corrected to reflect this accurate spelling during the hearing. (Tr. 5-7.) 
1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                           )       ISCR Case No. 14-039791
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred more than $28,000 in delinquent debts over the past decade,
most of which remain unresolved. He misused a prior employer’s travel credit card for
about $8,000 in personal expenses, leading to several counseling sessions before his
termination. He denied those facts on his security clearance application. The evidence
is insufficient to mitigate resulting security concerns. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on October 15,
2013. On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing
The case file contains two signature pages, the first of which is dated and notarized on October 22, 2014,2
and the second of which is dated and notarized on December 2, 2014.  It appears that his initial answer to
the SOR did not contain responses to the allegations under Guideline E.  He admitted those allegations in
his second response.
SOR ¶ 1.m was amended to reflect that the 2004 tax lien was for a Federal, vice a state, tax delinquency. 3
SOR ¶ 2.c was amended to delete reference to SOR ¶ 1.m, since the tax lien was more than 7 years old.
2
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in several written responses (AR)  and requested a2
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on January 28, 2015. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2015. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on February 25,
2015, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 19, 2015. The Government
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
testified on his own behalf, and offered exhibits (AE) A and B, which were also admitted
without objection. 
During the hearing, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17, I amended ¶¶ 1.m and 2.c of
the SOR to conform to the evidence with the consent of both parties.  I also granted3
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until April 8, 2015, for submission of
additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 26,
2015. Applicant timely submitted AE C and D, which were admitted without objection
and the record closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since April 2013. He is divorced, with two adult children. He is a high school
graduate. He enlisted in the Army in October 1972, and served honorably until he
retired in November 1992. He has held a security clearance since 1973. (GE 1; Tr. 8-
10.) 
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR with some explanations.
(AR.) The record credit reports and his SF 86 substantiate the accuracy of all alleged
delinquencies and falsifications. (GE 1; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) Applicant’s admissions,
including those contained in his response to DoD CAF interrogatories (GE 2), are
incorporated in the following findings.
3
Applicant owed more than $28,000 to multiple creditors for  delinquent consumer
and Federal income tax debts. He recently repaid the two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h
and 1.j, totaling $726. (AE B; AE C; Tr. 34-35, 50-51.) He also made a $108 payment
toward the $647 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g on March 28, 2015, which reduced the
current balance to $432; and paid off another loan debt that was not listed on the SOR
on March 12, 2015. (AE A; AE D; Tr. 33-34.) He produced no evidence of progress
toward resolving his remaining debts, including a Federal income tax lien from 2004 for
almost $10,000. 
Other than two brief periods of unemployment totaling about three months,
Applicant was fully employed during the past ten years. He attributed his financial
delinquencies to, “overspending beyond my means.” He knowingly misused his
company’s travel credit card for about $8,000 in personal expenses that he could not
otherwise afford to pay, for which he was counseled and ultimately terminated from a
previous job. (AR; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 28, 35-37, 40-42.)    
Applicant provided no documentation to support his claim that he has worked
with a debt consolidation law firm to assist him with resolving his debts. He testified that
the firm has not achieved any progress, but instead monitors his credit reports for him.
(Tr. 28, 37-38.) He did not provide a budget or financial statement from which his ability
to repay existing debt or avoid incurring future debt could be evaluated.
Applicant admitted that he falsified his SF 86 responses to deny his delinquent
debts, and adverse employment actions for company travel credit card abuse. He
offered no credible explanation for these falsifications, particularly in light of the fact that
he has been holding and renewing his security clearance for more than 40 years.
Instead, he asserted that he needed his job to pay off his debts. (AR; Tr. 27-28, 40-42.)
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted
no character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.
  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
4
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The record evidence potentially raises security concerns under two Guideline F
DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant accrued more than $28,000 in delinquent debts over the past ten or
more years, and demonstrated neither the means nor a reasonable effort to resolve
them. This evidence raised security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting
the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts are substantial and ongoing, without indication that
the circumstances under which they arose have changed. He therefore failed to
establish substantial mitigation under MC 20(a). 
Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under
MC 20(b). He has been fully employed during the period he incurred substantial
delinquent debts, and has not taken reasonable steps to resolve them. This is not
responsible action under the circumstances, even if some arose from circumstances
beyond his control.
6
Applicant did not undergo financial counseling. He neither documented any
effective effort to resolve most of the SOR-listed delinquent debts, nor asserted any
legitimate basis to dispute their validity. He repaid two of those debts, totaling $726, and
they no longer raise security concerns. These facts preclude a finding of significant
mitigation under MC 20(c), (d), or (e). 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be
disqualifying with relation to the allegations in this case:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (4) evidence of significant misuse
of Government or other employer’s time or resources.
There is substantial evidence showing that Applicant’s denial of his significant
delinquent debts, and adverse employment actions for misusing the travel credit card of
his former employer for personal expenses, on his SF 86 was a deliberate falsification
with intent to conceal information that he knew to be relevant to his eligibility for a
security clearance. His attempt to justify these falsifications during the hearing was not
credible. The credit card misuse generated several counseling sessions, led to his
termination, and involved about $8,000 that he used to pay personal obligations that he
voluntarily incurred but could not otherwise afford. Security concerns under DC 16(a)
and 16(d) were established.
7
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under this
guideline. Two have potential applicability under the facts in this case:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Applicant did not attempt to correct his SF 86 falsifications about delinquent
debts until confronted with the facts by the OPM investigator, and his continuing denial
of intent to deceive concerning the credit card abuse was neither credible nor
reasonable. These falsifications involved his recent application to renew his long-held
clearance, and were deliberate. He demonstrated no basis to conclude that it does not
reflect adversely on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Accordingly,
mitigation was not established under MC 17(a) or 17(c).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred substantial
delinquent indebtedness over the past ten or more years that he has made only minimal
recent effort to repay. All but two of these debts remain outstanding, creating the
ongoing potential for pressure and duress. The evidence does not support a finding that
continuation or recurrence are unlikely, or that behavioral changes demonstrate
rehabilitation. He is a mature and experienced individual who is accountable for his
8
choices and financial irresponsibility. He attempted to conceal these debts and his
misuse of a former employer’s credit card for personal expenses, in connection with his
application to renew his security clearance, and offered insufficient justification for his
conduct. Overall, the record evidence creates ongoing and serious doubt as to
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applcant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k through 1.n: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
