1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 14-02554 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
 
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge: 
 
While Applicant had filed neither federal nor state tax returns for several years, 
his documented action in filing returns and paying taxes sufficiently allays the security 
concerns arising from the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 26, 2013, Applicant signed and certified an electronic questionnaires 
for investigations processing (e-QIP, Item 5). He was interviewed by an investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on February 21, 2013. (Item 6) On 
August 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued the Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations (Guideline F). (Item 1) 
The   action  was  taken   under  Executive   Order  10865,  Safeguarding   Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
2  
(January  2,  1992),  as  amended  (Directive);  and  the  adjudicative  guidelines  (AG) 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant furnished his notarized answer to the SOR on August 23, 2014. He 
decided to have his case decided on the administrative record. A copy of the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), the Government’s evidence in support 
of the allegations of the SOR, was sent to Applicant on February 25, 2015. In an 
attachment to the FORM, Applicant was advised he could object to the information in 
the FORM or submit additional information in explanation, mitigation, or extenuation. He 
received the FORM on March 6, 2015. His response to the FORM was dated April 2, 
2015. Attached to his response are 11 exhibits (Exh. 1-9). On April 7, 2015, Department 
Counsel indicated he had no objection to the documentation in Applicant’s response. 
The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Appellant failed to file federal tax returns as required by 
law for 2006 to 2011. (SOR 1.a) He failed to file state tax returns as required by law for 
tax years 2005 to 2011. (SOR 1.b) He admitted both allegations and explained that he 
received filing extensions for the federal taxes in all cases. He paid the estimated 
federal taxes required with each extension. He filed the federal tax returns and paid 
most of the taxes or penalties except for 2010 and 2011. He expected to have the 
missing federal returns filed within two weeks to a month, then deal with any potential 
penalty or interest that would be assessed. 
 
Regarding  the  missing  state  returns,  Applicant  admitted  that  he  did  not  file 
returns for years 2005 to 2011. In 2013, he received a notice of assessment for tax year 
2009, and he paid the assessment of $2,814.1 He believed he would be receiving 
additional notices for the other years, but none were sent. He intended to contact the 
state tax agency to investigate the status of the 2005 through 2008 tax years. He 
intended to file the 2010 and 2011 state tax returns after he filed federal tax returns for 
those years. Applicant has paid most of the federal and state taxes and penalties and 
will pay any taxes or penalties for tax returns that have not been filed. He attached the 
2009 state notice of assessment. He noted that he was ready to make a withdrawal 
from his $175,000 retirement account to cover any taxes or penalties that could be 
imposed. He did not attach copies of tax returns he claimed were filed. (Answer to SOR, 
attachment, 2009 notice of assessment; retirement account statement) 
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He was married in August 1983 and separated in June 
2004. He has a 30-year-old son. After receiving a bachelor’s degree in May 1981 from a 
military university, he served in the U.S. Army on active duty for 20 years and retired in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  H e paid the assessm ent in M arch 2013. (Exh. 9) 
3 
May 2001.2  He has been employed by a defense contractor as a systems engineer  
 
since December 2012. Before his current employment, he was a chief systems engineer 
for another contractor for eight years. He has no alcohol or drug issues. He has held a 
security clearance since March 2001, and has never had a security violation. 
 
In his e-QIP dated January 26, 2013, Applicant identified all federal and state tax 
years in which he did not file returns. On February 21, 2013, he confirmed to an OPM 
investigator that he did not file the federal and state tax returns at issue. He explained 
that in 2012, he filed his 2006 federal tax return and paid taxes. In 2011, he filed his 
2007 and 2008 federal tax returns and paid $50 in taxes for 2007 and $300 in taxes for 
2008. In 2011, he filed his 2009 federal return and paid $300 in taxes. (Item 5 at 45-46; 
Item 6 at 4) 
 
Applicant told the OPM investigator that a missing W-2 form prevented him from 
filing his federal and state tax returns for 2010. Though procrastination/oversight and 
not having the proper paperwork appeared to be his primary reasons for not filing the 
returns,  he  did  not  consider  that  his  procrastination/oversight  represented  poor 
judgment. (Item 5 at 45-46; Item 6 at 4) 
 
On April 2, 2015, Applicant submitted his 5-page response to the FORM with 11 
exhibits. He registered objections to the language used in the government’s brief 
(attached to the FORM) supporting the SOR. He registered objections to the brief 
equating a failure to file tax returns with poor judgment. Then, he raised objections to 
several of the cases cited in the government’s brief as either being irrelevant or 
distinguishable for assorted reasons. However, Applicant conceded that “. . .failure to 
file income tax returns could be the basis for an adverse security clearance [decision] as 
that is stated in Guideline F.” (Response to FORM at 1-2) 
 
Applicant’s 11 tax exhibits appended to his response to the FORM show that he 
filed federal returns and paid taxes and penalties for 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. 
However, he provided no documentation in support of his interview summary claim of 
filing federal returns or paying taxes for 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009. (Item 6 at 4; 
Response to FORM at 3-4; Exh. 1, 2, 10, and 11) 
 
Regarding the missing state returns, Applicant provided documentation of filing 
state returns and paying taxes, including penalties and interest for 2005 through 2008, 
and 2010 through 2013.3  The state tax agency indicated on March 30, 2015, that his 
filed 2014 tax return had not processed. He planned to file his 2009 state return on May 
1, 2015, even though a state tax agent told him that he did not have to file a tax return 
because he paid the assessment. (Response to FORM at 3-4; Exh. 4-9) 
 
 
2  Between M arch 2001 and M ay 2001, Applicant was on term inal leave from the Arm y w h ile w ork ing for a 
com puter corporation. Because he could be called back to the service at any tim e, he entered “retired” rather 
than “discharged” from the service. (Item 6 at 2) 
 
3 , Applicant filed state tax returns for 2012 and 2013 before th e end of calendar year 2014. (R esponse to 
FO R M at 3) 
4 
Applicant does not believe he is a security risk because his documentation shows  
 
that he has his tax problems resolved or under control. As was discussed in the 
explanatory information cited above in Statement of the Case, an applicant has the 
burden of presenting evidence in rebuttal, mitigation, or extenuation. Therefore, it is 
Applicant’s responsibility to submit character evidence about himself. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in the AG. Each guideline lists 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are useful in evaluating 
an applicant's eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
The administrative judge's ultimate goal is to reach a fair and impartial decision 
that is based on sound and prudent judgment. The decision should also include a 
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the "whole-person 
concept" that brings together all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to the potential, rather than actual, 
risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.l.14., the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.l.l5., the applicant is 
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." Because 
this case is decided on the administrative record, credibility assessments of Applicant 
are limited to his statements and interview summaries. The applicant bears the ultimate 
burden of persuasion in demonstrating that he warrants a favorable security clearance 
decision. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial  Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive 
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage.  Affluence  that  cannot  be  explained  by  known  sources  of 
5 
 
 
income  is  also  a  security  concern.  It  may  indicate  proceeds  from 
financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
One disqualifying condition under ¶ 19 is potentially applicable: 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
The explanations of procrastination, oversight, and not having the proper 
paperwork to file the returns do not excuse Applicant’s deliberate failure to file federal 
tax and state tax returns for the years identified in the SOR. His acts of omission over 
several years represent a pattern of poor judgment within the ambit of AG ¶ 19(g). The 
burden shifts to Applicant to rebut or mitigate the security concerns related to not filing 
tax returns. 
 
The potentially pertinent mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment; 
 
(b)  the  conditions  that  resulted  in  the  financial  problem  were  largely 
beyond the person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) applies in part. Applicant indicated he started filing returns for the 
missing years in 2011, more than two years before the SOR was issued. There is 
documented proof that he satisfied the 2009 state assessment in March 2013. Though 
he did not file most of the other missing returns until after he received the SOR, he 
appears to have a growing understanding of the importance of complying with the 
federal and state laws requiring him to file annual tax returns in a timely manner. 
 
Neither prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant offered no evidence of any 
unforeseen event beyond his control that resulted in his repeated failure to meet his 
obligations to federal and state tax agencies. Though he acted responsibly to file the 
federal and state returns, the risk of losing his security clearance probably was a 
motivating factor in his curative action. 
6 
 
 
Applicant has filed most of his federal and state tax returns. Based on the 
credible and detailed documentation from the federal and state agencies supporting his 
claims of filing federal returns for 2010 through 2013, and filing state returns for 2005 
through 2014, I believe Applicant filed the 2006 through 2009 federal returns and paid 
the corresponding taxes in 2011 and 2012. Considering the evidence as a whole, 
Applicant receives mitigation under the second prong of AG ¶ 20(c) which indicates 
there are “clear indications the problem is being resolved or is under control.” His filing 
of most of the returns and payment of taxes establishes limited mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of 
the financial considerations guideline. I have also weighed the circumstances within the 
context of nine variables of the whole-person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an 
individual's conduct, the administrative judge should consider the following factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(a): (1) (the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct); (2) (the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation); (3) (the 
frequency and recency of the conduct); (4) (the individual's age and maturity at the time 
of the conduct); (5) (the extent to which the participation was voluntary); (6) (the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes); (7) 
(the motivation for the conduct); (8) (the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress); and (9) (the likelihood of continuation or recurrence). 
 
The final security clearance decision must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the specific guidelines, each of which is to be 
evaluated in the context of the whole person. (AG ¶ 2(c)) 
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He served his country honorably for 20 years. For 11 
years, he has been employed as a systems engineer for two defense contractors. He 
has held a security clearance since 2001 without any security violations. He has no drug 
or alcohol issues. His failure to file federal and state tax returns demonstrates poor 
judgment. However, he displayed good judgment by filing several federal returns and 
paying taxes in 2011 and 2012, before the SOR was issued. He filed almost all federal 
returns before the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a lien or garnishment against his 
earnings or his property. Although most of the action to correct his tax issues did not 
occur until after he received the SOR, he provided sufficient evidence for me to 
confidently conclude that he will timely file and pay his federal and state taxes in the 
future. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT 
7 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Paul J. Mason 
Administrative Judge 
