 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05484 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 From 2004 to 2010, Applicant was arrested or cited 12 times for criminal conduct 
involving alcohol consumption. As a consequence, she was incarcerated and placed on 
probation for periods of time. Although she presented evidence of rehabilitation since 
January 2013, she failed to sufficiently mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised 
under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. She 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Her eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
On July 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption, Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
 
2 
 
 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); DoD 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within 
the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On February 16, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On April 13, 2015, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 24, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the case for May 19, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A into evidence. All exhibits were admitted. The record remained 
open until June 12, 2015, to give Applicant time to submit additional exhibits. She timely 
submitted five exhibits, which I marked as AE B through F, and admitted without 
objection from Department Counsel. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 
29, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the 
SOR. Her admissions are incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and unmarried. She graduated from high school in 
2003. She was married from 2006 to 2008. In June 2013 she began a position with a 
healthcare company. (Tr. 10-13.) 
  
 Applicant has a long history of criminal conduct relating to alcohol abuse. In 
December 2003 she was terminated from employment having arrived at work under the 
influence of alcohol. On two different occasions in June 2004, she was cited and 
arrested for alcohol-related crimes, and later convicted. She was 20 years old.  
 
 In 2005 Applicant was arrested and charged with alcohol-related crimes in July, 
September, and December. During that time frame, she was arrested four times for 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), and was subsequently convicted. (Tr. 22.) In November 
2005 she was charged with dishonored check, a misdemeanor, and later pled guilty. 
(Answer.)  
 
 In April 2006 Applicant entered a 28-day inpatient treatment program for alcohol 
abuse, where she was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. After being released, she failed 
to participate in an aftercare program and resumed the consumption of alcohol. (Tr. 23; 
Answer.) In September 2006 she was cited for having an open bottle of alcohol in her 
vehicle. (Answer.)  
 
 Between June 2004 and December 2006, Applicant spent about 30 days in jail 
for various crimes. (Tr. 21.) She was also placed on probation four times, including a 
two-year period from 2005 to 2007. (Tr. 45; Answer.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In January 2007 Applicant was arrested and charged with fleeing a peace officer 
and obstructing the legal process. In August 2007 she was charged with loud noise and 
disorderly conduct. Both charges involved the consumption of alcohol. She was 
incarcerated from February 2007 to July 2007. (Answer.) 
 
 In May 2010 Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI; violating one-way 
traffic device; careless driving; and felony eluding. In June 2010, while on bond, she 
was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle while intoxicated, 5th charge (OWI); 
open container; dark window/windshield; and failure to comply with order of peace 
officer. In December 2010 she pled guilty to the May 2010 OWI felony and felony 
eluding charges. The other charges from May and June 2010 were dismissed. She was 
sentenced to five years in prison and ordered to pay costs, fines, and restitution. She 
was incarcerated from March 2011 until June 2012, at which time she entered a work 
release program. In August 2012 she was placed on parole until April 2013. (Tr. 44.) 
While on parole she worked for a hotel chain. In June 2013 she started her current 
position. (Tr. 45.) Her driver’s license was suspended at times between 2005 and 2013. 
(Tr. 27, 33.)  
 
 In January 2011, prior to beginning incarceration in March 2011, Applicant 
started participating in an intensive alcohol treatment program through the criminal 
justice system, which included extensive therapy with a counselor and a psychiatrist. 
(Tr. 47.) After leaving prison in June 2012, she continued treatment and attendance at 
Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) until January 2013. (Tr. 41.) She said that she has changed 
her life and environment since leaving prison and completing treatment in January 
2013. As a consequence of treatment, she gained significant insight into the 
psychological reasons underlying her alcoholic behavior, anger, and unhappiness. (Tr. 
47-48.) She admitted that she was not mature at the time she participated in treatment 
in 2006 and when she chose not to continue in aftercare. (Tr. 39.) 
 
 Applicant understood the negative effect alcohol has had on her life. She does 
not consider herself alcohol dependent at this time, but recognizes that it has created 
serious problems for her in the past. She said she no longer has a craving for alcohol. 
(Tr. 37.) The last time she consumed alcohol was in January 2011, before she entered 
the criminal justice system. (Tr. 28.) She does not intend to resume drinking alcohol in 
the future. (Tr. 40-41.) She has not participated in any type of aftercare or AA meetings 
since January 2013 because she has not felt it necessary for her to maintain sobriety. 
She is happy with her life and does not want to jeopardize it by drinking alcohol. (Tr. 37-
38, 43.) 
  
 Applicant submitted numerous exhibits attesting to her rehabilitative efforts. She 
successfully completed substance abuse treatment programs, and workplace and life 
skill courses while incarcerated. (Tr. 53-54; Answer.) Her supervisor wrote a letter 
complementing her work and productivity. (Answer.) She provided a 2014 performance 
evaluation that gave her a high rating and subsequent promotion, effective June 1, 
2015. (AE B, AE C, AE E.) She received a bonus for excellent performance in February 
 
4 
 
 
2015. (AE D.) Applicant submitted a copy of a May 2015 credit bureau report, 
documenting the resolution of debts delinquent since 2005. (Tr. 51; AE A.)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
5 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to alcohol 
consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describe three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 From 2004 to 2010, Applicant was arrested or cited for alcohol-related incidents 
on 12 different occasions. Those incidents included, driving while under the influence 
and to the point of having impaired judgment, disturbing the peace, and reporting to 
work intoxicated. The incidents raise trustworthiness concerns under the above 
 
6 
 
 
disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate the concerns. 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  Applicant has a seven-year history of abusing alcohol, beginning in 2003 and 
continuing into early 2010. Given that long history and the fact that she has not 
participated in aftercare, AA or other forms of treatment since January 2013, there is 
insufficient evidence to determine that similar conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 23(a) 
does not apply. Applicant admits that she had a serious problem with alcohol prior to 
January 2011, which is the last time she stated that she consumed it. There is evidence 
that she participated in substance abuse treatment from January 2011 to January 2013, 
while incarcerated and on parole. Applicant established some mitigation under AG ¶ 
23(b). Because she is not participating in an employee assistance treatment program, 
AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. Although she completed a treatment program in January 
2013 that was court-ordered, she did not provide an evaluation or opinion from a duly 
qualified health care provider involved in that treatment or an independent provider 
indicating a favorable prognosis or that aftercare is not required. AG ¶ 23(d) does not 
apply.        
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses. 
 
Between 2003 and 2010, Applicant was convicted or cited 12 times for criminal 
conduct related to alcohol abuse, and another time for unrelated conduct. The last 
conviction was in December 2010. She was incarcerated several times, once for six 
months in 2007, and again from 2011 to 2012. The evidence raised the above qualifying 
condition. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited  
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse 
or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply for the reasons articulated in the analysis of AG ¶ 
23(a), above. Applicant presented some evidence of rehabilitation. She was 
successfully released from parole in January 2013. There is no evidence of criminal 
activity since June 2010. She participated in substance abuse rehabilitation until 
January 2013. She submitted documentation confirming a good employment record and 
gaining her employer’s support. While testifying, she exhibited candor and visible 
remorse over her past conduct. These factors establish some mitigation under AG ¶ 
32(d).  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
8 
 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
 AG ¶ 16 sets forth potentially disqualifying conditions, none of which are 
independently supported by this record. To the extent that Appellant’s history of criminal 
conduct and alcohol abuse involve questionable judgment or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, said conduct can also be considered to support 
trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶ 15. However, no personal conduct mitigating 
condition was raised or supported by the record. This case is appropriately alleged and 
analyzed under the guidelines for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an honest, intelligent, 
hardworking 30-year-old woman, who began a position with a defense contractor in 
2013. She has a history of alcohol abuse, which began when she was 20 years old. For 
seven years she engaged in criminal conduct related to the significant abuse of alcohol. 
She was convicted 12 times, incarcerated and placed on probation several times. She 
candidly admits her misconduct and expresses remorse. She testified about her 
rehabilitative efforts since January 2011 when she entered a treatment program through 
the criminal justice system. Upon her release from incarceration, she continued in 
substance abuse treatment until January 2013. She presented an impressive record of 
work performance over the past year. Her efforts to maintain sobriety and a healthy 
lifestyle are commendable. However, her history of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct 
is long and serious, and she did not present evidence to assure the Government that 
 
9 
 
 
she has sufficiently resolved the psychological issues underpinning her alcoholic 
behaviors, or that she established the skills and support system to assist her through 
difficult times in the future. She has not continued in aftercare treatment, such as AA or 
counseling, since January 2013, nor did she present evidence from an independent 
health care provider corroborating her statements that further treatment is not 
necessary. While the absence of alcohol related conduct for the past five years is 
noteworthy, that fact, along with some evidence of rehabilitation, is insufficient to 
outweigh her past history of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct and inconsistent with 
holding a public trust position. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position at this time. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. Trustworthiness 
concerns arising under the personal conduct guideline are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:        Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
