 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------    )  ISCR Case No. 14-05159 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges he failed to file his state tax 
returns for 2004 through 2006 in state A, and state A filed a tax lien in 2014, for 
$28,795. Applicant believed he was a resident of state B and had no obligation to file a 
tax return in state A. In April 2014, he paid the state tax debt owed to state A. He has no 
delinquent debts. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On November 14, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On May 29, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and he did not 
request a hearing. (Item 1) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated May 7, 2015, was provided to him on June 4, 2015. On June 29, 2014, DOHA 
received Applicant’s undated response to the FORM and provided additional mitigating 
evidence. On July 1, 2015, Department Counsel did not object to consideration of the 
additional evidence. On July 14, 2015, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted he failed to file his state tax returns 
for 2004 through 2006 in state A, and state A filed a tax lien in 2014 for $28,795. (Item 
1) He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (Item 1) His admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old maritime engineer, who has worked for defense 
contractors and ship owners since 2000. In 2009, he married. His children were born in 
2009 and 2013. Applicant’s parents live in state A, and from 1980 through 1983, he 
attended high school in state A. He served in the Navy from 1983 to 1992, and he 
received an honorable discharge. From 1996 through 2000, Applicant lived in state B to 
attend college, and he became “a voting resident” of state B. (FORM response) In 2000, 
he received a bachelor’s degree, and in 2000, he moved to a foreign country. He 
asserts he became a state B resident for tax purposes in 2000. There is no evidence of 
disciplinary problems with his employer, illegal drug use, criminal offenses, or alcohol 
abuse. 
   
Applicant did not file his state tax returns for 2004 through 2006 in state A, and 
state A filed a tax lien in 2014, for $28,795 for tax years 2004 through 2006.2 In April 
2014, Applicant paid the state tax debt owed to state A, and, on June 9, 2015, state A 
wrote that the balance owed was zero. Applicant has about $300,000 in an investment 
account. He has lived in a foreign country with his spouse and children or aboard U.S. 
flagged ships the previous 15 years. His 2015 credit report indicates “pays as agreed” 
for all debts with a balance, and it does not indicate any delinquent accounts or negative 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this 
paragraph and the next paragraph is his Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject 
interview (PSI), SOR response, and his March 12, 2014, Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Items 1-3) 
 
2Applicant’s April 9, 2014 OPM PSI indicates he did not file state A income tax returns for the 
previous seven years; however, he has not received a lien or other evidence of state A collection efforts 
for tax years after 2006. (Item 3) The SOR and FORM do not raise the issue of whether he failed to file 
state A tax returns from 2000 to 2004 or from 2007 to present. See note 5, infra.   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
financial entries. (FORM response) Aside from the state A tax debt, there is no evidence 
of delinquent debts. 
 
There is no evidence of credit counseling. Applicant did not provide a budget or 
comprehensive information about his income or expenses the last several years. His 
employment evaluations show outstanding ratings. (FORM response)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).    
   
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required.” Applicant’s history of delinquent 
debt is documented in his SF 86, SOR response, Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), and FORM response. He failed to file his state 
tax returns for 2004 through 2006 in state A, and state A filed a tax lien in 2014 for 
$28,795. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
19(c), and 19(g) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants application of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), and 20(d). His delinquent debts “occurred under such circumstances that [are] 
unlikely to recur and [do] not cast doubt on [her] current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” He had a subjective belief that he was not a resident of state A, and as 
such, he did not have to file state A tax returns after 2000. In April 2014, he paid the 
state tax debt owed to state A for tax years 2004 through 2006. On June 9, 2015, state 
A wrote that the balance owed was zero. He has no delinquent debts. He acted 
responsibly under the circumstances by paying his debts. Although he did not receive 
financial counseling, there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took reasonable and responsible 
actions to resolve his SOR debt, establishing his good faith. His efforts are sufficient to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old maritime engineer, who has worked for defense 
contractors and ship owners since 2000. In 2000, he received a bachelor’s degree, and 
in 2000, he moved to a foreign country. He served in the Navy from 1983 to 1992, and 
he received an honorable discharge. His employment evaluations show outstanding 
ratings. There is no evidence of disciplinary problems with his employer, illegal drug 
use, criminal offenses, or alcohol abuse. 
 
Applicant lived in state B while attending college from 1996 to 2000 and in a 
foreign country from 2000 to present. He failed to file his state tax returns for 2004 
through 2006 in state A, and state A filed a tax lien in 2014, for $28,795. Applicant 
believed he was a resident of state B for state tax purposes, and he had no obligation to 
file a tax return in state A. In April 2014, he paid the state tax debt owed to state A. His 
credit report indicates all of his credit accounts are in good standing, and he has no 
delinquent debts. 
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will maintain his financial 
responsibility.3    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s state 
taxes from 2000 to 2005 and from 2007 to present. The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial 
status at any time through credit reports, investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now 
does not bar the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right 
to reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation 
of a promise made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under 
Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not 
have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 
(App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant 
[a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security 
clearance while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
