KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant cites to favorable evidence but has not demonstrated that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary capricious or contrary to law.  Adverse decsion
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03247.a1
DATE: 07/17/2015
DATE: July 17, 2015
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03247
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 1, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 7, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense company for about 20 years.  He has a good employment
record, and his annual compensation is about $52,000.  He has held a security clearance for many
years.  He and his wife have three adult children, the youngest of whom is attending college. 
Applicant is assisting with college expenses.  Applicant’s wife recently got laid off from her
employment, but she received a severance package of six months of pay.
Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts:  two charged-off accounts, an unpaid
judgment, and a past-due mortgage loan.  Applicant stated that he paid off four collection accounts
not alleged in the SOR.  He has paid off a car loan, and his wages are being garnished by the IRS
for repayment of back taxes.  The tax debt was not alleged in the SOR either.  Applicant paid or
settled the two charged-off accounts.
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the judgment had been the subject of a garnishment. 
However, when the IRS began garnishing his wages for his tax debt, the previous garnishment action
stopped.  Applicant submitted no documentation regarding the unpaid judgment.
Applicant’s mortgage debt originated from his having refinanced his house with an interest-
only loan, that he later found to be too expensive.  He sought to refinance, but the two loan proposals
that his bank offered him were not acceptable.  An attorney advised Applicant to stop making
payments on his mortgage in order to persuade the lender to refinance on more favorable terms. 
Applicant followed this advice, and the lender foreclosed.  The lending institution itself was closed
by the Office of Thrift Supervision, and all deposits and loans were transferred to another bank. 
Applicant has received no documentation about the status of the foreclosure sale, including an IRS
Form 1099.  
Applicant stands to inherit nearly $100,000 from his father’s estate.  He has received about
$20,000 and expects the balance by the end of 2015. He will use this money to pay off his debts. 
Applicant provided no documentation concerning the inheritance.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge resolved the two paid debts favorably to Applicant.  However, he concluded that
Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his mortgage delinquency and the judgment. 
He concluded that Applicant’s plan to pay these debts from an expected inheritance was too
speculative to establish that his debts are under control.  He stated that other than garnishment,
Applicant has done little to resolve his debts.
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence concerning the extent to which his debts have been resolved.  His
argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record or that he weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00273 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2014).  Applicant’s brief includes
matters not contained in the record, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant
argues that the evidence is not consistent as to the amount he still owes on the judgment.  To the
extent that he is challenging the Judge’s findings of fact, we conclude that the findings are based on
substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the evidence.  Applicant has cited to
no error likely to change the outcome of the case  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jul. 25, 2014).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
