 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-04695 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his financial situation. He 
accumulated over $15,000 in delinquent debt and failed to present evidence of having 
taken responsible action to address his past-due debts or a reasonable basis to dispute 
the debts. He also failed to present evidence that his financial situation is under control. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On December 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.1 On November 22, 2014, Applicant answered the 
SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the written record 
(Answer). 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On February 12, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains six documentary exhibits that are 
admitted into evidence, without objection, as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 6. Applicant 
did not submit a response to the FORM within the allotted 30-day period. See Hearing 
Exhibit 1 (acknowledging receipt of FORM). 
 
 On May 28, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. On my own motion, I opened 
the record to provide Applicant a final opportunity to submit a response to the FORM. 
See Hx. II (e-mail to parties). Applicant elected not to submit a Response, and the 
record closed on June 10, 2015. 
 
Motion to Withdraw 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR 1.b and, without objection, the 
motion is granted. The SOR now alleges nine debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.c – 1.j.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a federal contractor and has been working for his current employer 
since 2014. He enlisted in the U.S. military after graduating from high school, and was 
discharged after three years of honorable service. He is married and has one minor 
child. He is seeking a security clearance for the first time in connection with his job. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems started in late 2010, early 2011, when he was 
unemployed for a period of about six months. He also attributes some of his financial 
problems to starting his own business in 2013. He disclosed on his security clearance 
application (SCA) and discussed with a security clearance background investigator how 
he ended up incurring a substantial amount of delinquent debt. Applicant explained that 
while unemployed, he started using his credit cards to purchase groceries, gas, and 
other household items. He also discussed with the investigator falling behind on the 
mortgage on his home when he started his own business and it failed to generate 
sufficient income to keep pace with his family’s expenses.  
 
Applicant addressed his mortgage by negotiating a modification.2 He submitted 
documentary proof with his Answer of satisfying the $380 debt referenced in SOR ¶ 1.h. 
He claimed in his SCA and during his background interview that he received financial 
counseling, but did not submit documentation to support his claim. He also did not 
submit evidence of having taken steps to address or documentation to support a valid 
claim disputing the remaining eight SOR debts. These eight debts are listed at SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.c – 1.g, and 1.i – 1.j, and reflect debts that have been reduced to judgment, 
charged off, or are in collection. The debts range in outstanding amounts of $110 to 
over $5,000. The eight SOR debts together total over $15,000, and remain unresolved.3   
 
                                                          
2 Gx. 4 at 2; Gx. 6 at 5. 
 
3 Gx. 4 (eight SOR debts listed on recent credit report).  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.”).  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding individuals who accumulates a substantial 
amount of delinquent debt is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
Thus, the financial considerations security “concern is broader than the possibility that 
an applicant might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money 
in satisfaction of his or her debts.”4 The concern also encompasses financial 
irresponsibility, which may indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant accumulated over $15,000 in delinquent debt that remains unresolved.5 
This record evidence raises the financial considerations security concern. It also 
establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19(c), a history 
of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
5 ISCR Case No. 14-03910 at 2 (App. Bd. June 24, 2015) (“it is well settled that adverse information from 
a credit report” will generally shift the burden to an applicant “to either establish that [they are] not 
responsible for the debt or that [other] matters in mitigation apply.”).  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are partly attributable to a period of unemployment 
and his businesses’ failure to generate sufficient income. He responsibly addressed his 
mortgage problem by negotiating a loan modification and by satisfying one of the SOR 
debts. However, AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable because he did not submit evidence 
of attempting to address his other past-due debts, to include the minor debts referenced 
in the SOR. He also did not submit evidence regarding his current finances nor provided 
documentation to support a reasonable basis upon which he could dispute the validity of 
the debts. His delinquent debts remain unaddressed and unresolved. Although 
applicants for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, or required to 
resolve all past-due debts simultaneously, or even resolve the delinquent debts listed in 
the SOR first, they are expected to present documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate 
security concerns raised by their circumstances, to include the accumulation of 
substantial delinquent debt.6 Applicant, even after being informed on numerous 
occasions of the need to submit documentation to support his claims,7 failed to do so. 
Accordingly, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but none of the other mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F. I 
gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
including Applicant’s military service and the fact that his debts were incurred in trying to 
support his family, not for other reasons that would raise an independent security 
concern. However, a significant amount of delinquent debt remains unresolved, and the 
serious security concerns raised by such debt remains unmitigated, especially in light of 
the lack of any evidence presented by Applicant regarding his current finances. After 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008). 
 
7 See Hx. I; FORM; Hx. II. 
 
8 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
weighing the favorable and unfavorable evidence, and considering the legal 
requirement that close cases, such as the present one, be decided in favor of national 
security, I conclude that Applicant failed to meet his burden in mitigating the financial 
considerations security concern. Accordingly, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts and questions about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:          Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:          Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.h:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
