KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A Judge is presumed to be impartial and a party claiming otherwise has a heavy
burden of persuasion.  The Board has no authority to rule on the wisdom of provisions of the
Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02383.a1
DATE: 07/21/2015
DATE: July 21, 2015
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02383
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 16, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On April 28, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against
Applicant; whether the Judge’s findings of fact contained errors; whether the Judge erred in
concluding that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns; whether the Judge failed
properly to apply the whole-person factors; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Since 2008, Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor.  He served in the U.S. military
until 2007, when he received a disability retirement.  Applicant’s SOR lists five delinquent debts,
totaling over $105,000, including a charged-off home equity line of credit, deficiency judgments
from the repossessions of automobiles, and credit card debts.  Applicant admits owing the debts
alleged in the SOR, further claiming that they will be resolved through Chapter 13 bankruptcy.
Applicant and his wife bought a house in 1998 for about $123,000, financing the purchase
with a mortgage loan.  They refinanced several years later and, soon after that, opened a home equity
line of credit that was secured by the house.  The credit limit was $87,000, and Applicant spent
about $40,000 on improvements to the house.  He used some of the proceeds from the line of credit
to pay for his wife’s fertility treatments.  His wife had to stop working during her pregnancy,
returning to the work force in 2008.
In 2005, Applicant bought a used luxury sport utility vehicle (SUV), the high credit on the
auto loan being $36,180.  As stated above, Applicant was discharged form the military in 2007 due
to medical problems that rendered him incapable of utilizing the specialized  skills he learned while
on active duty and which would have enabled him to earn more money.  His VA disability pay is
currently about $2,100 a month.  Applicant experienced a period of unemployment following his
discharge, and, although now employed, he earns less than he did while in the military.  
Because of his long commute to work, Applicant traded his SUV for a used luxury car that
was more fuel-efficient.  The high credit on this auto loan was $30,411.  Applicant’s wife stopped
working in 2012 due to medical problems, as well as to commuting costs and child care expenses. 
Applicant’s income was not sufficient to pay all the family’s bills as well as the mortgage on their
home.  He attempted to refinance, with no success, and he sought other means of reducing his
mortgage payments, including a short sale of his house.  An attorney advised him to stop paying his
bills and file for bankruptcy.  Applicant followed this advice, moving out of his home in December
2012 in anticipation of foreclosure proceedings.  
2
Applicant attempted to sell some of his cars, but the lienholder on one of them would not
accept it as a repossession.  When advised of Applicant’s plan to file for bankruptcy, the lienholder
stated that he would not accept the vehicle until Applicant had a bankruptcy case file number. 
Although Applicant still has this car, he has made no payments on the loan in several years.  
Applicant’s home went into foreclosure, selling for about $150,000.  He and his wife now
rent their living quarters from Applicant’s parents-in-law.  The couple filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy in March 2015.  The filing reveals $26,510 in secured claims and over $275,000 in
unsecured non-priority claims.  The plan calls for payments of $360 a month for 60 months. 
Applicant received financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process.  He states that he will
follow through with his bankruptcy plan.  His wife has a prt-time job and is looking for another one,
as is Applicant.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge acknowledged circumstances outside Applicant’s control that affected his
financial condition, such as his medical discharge from the military, his subsequent unemployment,
and his wife’s medical problems.  The Judge also noted evidence that Applicant’s having declined
to pay his bills was upon the advice of an attorney.  However, the Judge found that Applicant did
not file for bankruptcy for three years, during which time he made no payments on his debts.  The
Judge concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated a track record of debt resolution, insofar as
it is too soon to know if Applicant’s plan will even be approved, much less followed.  In light of this,
the Judge found that Applicant had not demonstrated responsible action in regard to his debts.  In
the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s military service.  He reiterated
his conclusion that it is too soon to tell if Applicant’s bankruptcy plan will be successful.
Discussion
Applicant begins his Appeal Brief by stating his belief that the Directive is out of date.  He
states that if it were to have been updated before his hearing, he would likely have received a
clearance.  He cites to no favorable evidence that the Directive in its current iteration prevented him
from offering to the Judge.  In any event, we have no authority to rule on the wisdom of the
provisions of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-07751 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2015).  
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him.  He stated that the Judge
constantly interrupted his presentation and belittled the decisions he made in his effort to regain his
financial health.  A Judge is presumed to be impartial, and a party claiming otherwise has a heavy
burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-07751, supra, at 3.  
We have examined the transcript and other evidence in the case, along with the Decision
itself.  While the Judge questioned Applicant frequently during the hearing, sometimes sharply, it
appears to have been an effort to clarify the evidence and to challenge aspects of Applicant’s
3
presentation that a reasonable person might find self-serving.1  We find nothing in the record that
would support a conclusion that the Judge evidenced an inflexible predisposition to decide the case
adversely to Applicant or that he otherwise divested himself of his impartiality.
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact, for example the date of the
foreclosure action.  We have examined the Judge’s findings in light of the record and conclude that
they are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the evidence. 
Applicant has not cited to a harmful error in the Judge’s findings of fact.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-01607 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015).  
Applicant cites to evidence such as his good security record as well as to the circumstances
underlying his financial problems.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in
the record, and Applicant’s appeal brief is not sufficient to rebut that presumption or to show that
the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00723 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2014).  
Applicant argues that he will not commit crimes in order to get money for debt resolution. 
To the extent that he is challenging the Judge’s conclusion that his circumstances raised security
concerns, we note that Guideline F is not concerned solely with the possibility that an applicant
might engage in illegal acts in order to pay his debts.  It also requires a Judge to examine the
applicant’s circumstances for what they may reveal about his self-control, judgment, and willingness
to abide by rules and regulations.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00434 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20,
2015).  In this case the record supports the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s ongoing financial
problems raised security concerns.  
Applicant’s Appeal Brief contains information from outside the record, which we cannot
consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant challenges the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  However, 
we conclude that Applicant’s argument merely poses an alternative interpretation of the evidence. 
The Judge’s whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of the Directive, in that he
evaluated Applicant’s financial problems and mitigation evidence in light of the record as a whole. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01567 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2015).  The Judge’s ultimate conclusion
that Applicant had not demonstrated a track record of debt resolution was consistent with the record
that was before him, in light of the recency of Applicant’s bankruptcy filing.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-00714 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2015).   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
1Referring to the mortgage lender, Applicant stated “they take care of their own and I have to take care of my
own. [Judge]: Sure. [Applicant]: So it just came to that.  Then it became a little personal because– [Judge]: It became
personal? [Applicant]: It became personal because . . . they’ve got to take care of their business and I’ve got to take care
of my business, that’s what I meant . . . [Judge]: You have no basis to be bitter about them.  They did everything you
asked of them.  It’s you who did not do what your promised.”  Tr. at 32-33.    
4
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
