 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-022061 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owes over $83,000 for two delinquent debts, the largest being a 
$75,000 unpaid mortgage that went into collections in 2009. Although he presented 
some evidence that he resolved five other debts, he failed to present sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the outstanding financial trustworthiness concerns. Based upon a thorough 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to ADP 
I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD 
C3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness 
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive Information Systems 
Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation). 
 
On September 9, 2013, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application 
(SF 85P). On November 10, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
                                            
1 The Statement of Reasons incorrectly labeled this as an ISCR case. 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); the Regulation (supra); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the DoD  for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 22, 2014 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
April 9, 2015, and issued a Notice of Hearing on April 24, 2015.  I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on May 20, 2015. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 29, 2015. The record remained open 
until June 15, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit other exhibits. He timely 
submitted AE D, which I admitted without an objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations contained in SOR in an email dated January 
28, 2015. (Answer.) Because he did not admit nor deny the individual allegations 
contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, Department Counsel requested that he file an oral 
answer to each allegation, which he did. He admitted the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e. He denied the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 
1.f, and 1.g, and offered explanations. (Tr. 6-8.) His admissions are incorporated into 
the findings of fact herein.   
 
Applicant is 41 years old and divorced since 2008. He started working for his 
current employer, a defense contractor, in September 2013.  He consulted with the 
company for six months prior to being hired. (Tr. 13.) Before starting the consulting 
position he was unemployed for a total of about six months or longer. He previously 
worked for a mortgage company for 13 years. (Tr. 14-18.)  
 
Applicant attributed the alleged delinquent debts to his divorce in 2008 and 
subsequent periods of unemployment. While going through the divorce he learned that 
his wife had accumulated a significant amount of credit card debt. Because her credit 
was poor, he obtained a second mortgage on a home he purchased in 2006. (Tr. 16-
17.) After the divorce, he was unable to manage all of his expenses without his former 
wife’s salary. (Tr. 33.) He also owed federal taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012.2 In 2013 
he resolved those taxes. (Tr. 21, 26.)  
 
                                            
2 The SOR alleged unpaid federal taxes for 2011 as a trustworthiness concern, but not for unpaid federal 
taxes for 2012, the amount of which is unclear. That fact will not be analyzed as a potential disqualifying 
condition, but will be considered under the analysis of mitigating conditions and the whole-person 
concept. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Based on credit bureau reports from September 2013 and September 2014, the 
SOR alleged seven delinquent debts totaling $105,529, which accumulated between 
2007 and 2013. The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
Four SOR debts are paid: ¶ 1.a for $282 (GE 2 at 21.); ¶ 1.b for $110 (AE D at 
1.); and ¶ 1.c for $612 (AE D at 2.). Applicant’s delinquent taxes of $1,826 for tax year 
2011, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, are paid, as are federal taxes for 2012. (AE D at 7, 8, 9.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for $75,593 is a second mortgage that Applicant 
assumed on a residence he purchased in May 2006 while married to his former wife. 
The bank subsequently foreclosed on the house, and the bank charged off the second 
mortgage in July 2009.  Applicant said the debt was no longer on his credit report.  (Tr. 
34-36; GE 4 at 8; AE D at 6.) When interviewed about this debt in October 2013, 
Applicant acknowledged that his former residence went into foreclosure, and this loan 
became a collection account. He said that he intended to address it in the future. (GE 2 
at 7.) This debt remains unresolved. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e for $6,429 is an unpaid credit card. Applicant said 
this was his former wife’s debt and is scheduled to “fall off my credit this September.” 
(Tr. 39.) He said he never used the card and does not have the money to pay it. He 
stated that the debt was charged off and not resolved through his former wife’s 
bankruptcy. (Tr. 39-41.) During the October 2013 interview, Applicant indicated that he 
would pay some or all of the debt. (GE 2 at 8.) Applicant filed a dispute with a credit 
bureau in August 2014; however, the debt remains unresolved. (GE 3 at 3.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f for $20,677 is his former wife’s responsibility. 
Applicant presented the divorce decree confirming his assertion. (Tr. 44; GE 2 at 33.) It 
is resolved.3 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $80,000. His net monthly income is $3,588 and 
expenses are $3,308, leaving him about $280 remaining. (AE D at 11.) He has not 
participated in credit or budget counseling. (Tr. 15.) 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent performance evaluation, dated February 
2015.  His supervisor gave him an overall rating of “Meets Expectations.” (AE D at 17.) 
Applicant also provided certificates, documenting achievements at work. (AE D at 17, 
18, 19.)  
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
                                            
3Although this debt is being considered resolved for purposes of this Decision, Applicant may still be 
responsible to the creditors for payment, as it is an unpaid joint marital debt. Applicant’s legal recourse 
would then require him to sue his former wife for the monies. 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has more than $82,000 in unresolved debt that he incurred within the 
past seven or eight years. The evidence raises both of the above trustworthiness 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s largest delinquent debt, an unpaid second mortgage, was charged off 
in 2009, and remains unresolved. The other delinquent debt, a credit card, became 
delinquent prior to his 2008 divorce. There is no substantive evidence indicating that 
Applicant intends to address either debt, calling into question his reliability. The 
evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
  
 Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose as a result of 
periods of unemployment and as a consequence of a divorce. While those 
circumstances may have been beyond his control, he did not provide evidence that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances, a factor that must be considered in 
establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Thus, this mitigating condition has little 
application to any debts.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or financial 
counseling. Given the large amount of the combined two delinquent debts, AG ¶ 20(c) 
has no application because there are not clear indications that his financial problems 
are under control. Applicant submitted proof that he made a good-faith effort to pay four 
debts and resolved another debt. Thus, AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.g. There is no evidence that Applicant successfully disputed 
any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a public trust position. He is an intelligent, 
articulate, and candid person, who has successfully worked for a defense contractor for 
more than two years. Since obtaining that position he has resolved four debts totaling 
$21,680, including delinquent federal taxes for 2011 and 2012. However, the largest 
debt for $75,593 remains unresolved since 2009 when it was charged off, in addition to 
a credit card debt for $6,429 that was opened while he was married and subsequently 
became delinquent. During an interview in October 2013, he said he intended to resolve 
both debts. Neither has been addressed, in particular the second mortgage, which he 
obtained to help purchase a home in 2006. Both of these debts remain his 
responsibility, regardless of whether they are reported on his credit report.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to financial considerations. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position 
of trust. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c:        For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:        For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
