 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01423 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and F (financial considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 18, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA).1 Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 13, 2014, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines H and F.  
                                                          
1 The SCA was a Questionnaire for National Security Positions. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
On August 6, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 25, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 5. On March 11, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply 
additional information. She did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on June 12, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline H, the SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana in varying 
frequency from 1982 to March 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged 
that she had nine delinquent debts totaling $13,425 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.i). In her Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a-2.f. Her admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old administrative assistance who has been working for a 
defense contractor since October 2013. In her SCA, she did not list any educational 
degrees or diplomas. Her first three marriages ended in divorce. She separated from 
her current husband in September 2013. She has three children, ages 27, 29, and 35. 
This is the first time that she has sought to obtain a security clearance.3 
 
In her SCA, Applicant disclosed that she used marijuana from August 1982 to 
March 2013. She also indicated that, within the past seven years, she used marijuana 
on a few occasions and further stated: 
 
In my young adult life through my early 40’s I sporadically used marijuana. 
The last time I used was in March 2013, I was going through a major 
marital breakdown, and I took a couple of puffs at the suggestion of a 
person who was helping me move. Prior to that I can’t remember the last 
time I used. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to periods of unemployment and 
marital problems. After being laid off from jobs, she was unemployed from September 
2012 to October 2013 and from June 2010 to December 2010. Her income was reduced 
by close to 75% during the periods of unemployment, and she encountered difficulty 
finding new jobs. She stated that she discovered her husband had been gambling and 
paying for another person’s living expenses for the five years that they were together. 
After discovering what he was doing, she “walked away” from the marriage. She 
indicated that bills snowballed, and she defaulted on debts.4 
                                                          
2 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
3 Item 4.  
 
4 Items 2, 3, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
 A credit report dated November 27, 2013, contains substantial evidence of each 
alleged debt. These debts have dates of last activity or dates of assignment to collection 
that range from July 2010 to September 2013. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that she made payment arrangements for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, and 2.e, 
but failed to provide any proof of payments. She submitted no evidence showing that 
any of the debts have been paid, disputed, or otherwise resolved.5  
 
 Little is known about Applicant’s current financial situation. She provided no 
evidence that she received financial counseling. She did not provide a monthly budget. 
It is unknown whether she has any discretionary income remaining each month after 
payment of her expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 3.  
 
4 
 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 The guideline lists several conditions that could raise disqualifying security 
concerns under AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant sporadically used marijuana from August 1982 to March 2013. Both AG 
¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply in this case. 
 
Two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant sporadically used marijuana over a period of about 31 years. The terms 
“sporadically” and “on a few occasions” are subject to varying interpretations. Details 
about the exact scope of her marijuana use are unknown. She last used it 
approximately 28 months ago when she was 49 years old. A person who helped her 
move was the individual who last provided her marijuana. It is unknown whether she still 
associates with that individual or with anyone else who may use marijuana. She did not 
provide a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any future 
violation. Insufficient evidence was presented to establish that her use of marijuana is 
unlikely to recur. Based on the evidence presented, her long history of “sporadic” 
marijuana use casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
Applicant admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debts because she experienced periods of 
unemployment and marital problems. Those were conditions beyond her control, but 
she failed to establish that she has acted responsibly in addressing the debts since 
 
7 
 
 
obtaining her current job in October 2013. She claimed that she entered into repayment 
arrangements for three debts, but provided no proof of any payments. She provided no 
proof that she has disputed or otherwise resolved any of the debts. No evidence was 
presented that she received financial counseling. Based on the evidence presented, her 
financial problems continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. None of the other mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.6 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information in the record 
about Applicant and concluded the favorable information does not outweigh the security 
concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion. Her drug 
involvement and financial problems raise doubts about her suitability for security 
clearance. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance 
must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
6 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
