 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-03363
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns about her significant and
persistent financial problems. Her request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 26, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation,
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
 Directive. 6.3.4
2
On August 6, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
December 2, 2014, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in3
support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on May 15, 2015, and was advised
she had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to
the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and the case was assigned to me
on June 25, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $18,201 for five
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.e) after previously having been discharged of
more than $108,000 of debt in May 2011 through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition filed
in January 2011 (SOR 1.f). Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. (FORM, Items
1 and 3) In addition to her admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 26 years old and works as an engineering technician for a defense
contractor. She has held that job since November 2013. Between 2006 and 2013,
Applicant had 18 different jobs, with brief periods of unemployment interspersed.
Applicant was fired from, or left under adverse circumstances, seven of those jobs.
Others she left for better opportunities. (FORM, Item 5)
When Applicant submitted her EQIP, she disclosed the debts and the bankruptcy
alleged in the SOR. The bankruptcy discharged her of more than $108,000 in debts. A
credit report obtained in January 2014 documented the alleged debts, all of which were
incurred after the Chapter 7 discharge in 2011. 
Applicant and her husband, married since May 2009, have been separated since
August 2013. Applicant has blamed her financial problems on the fact that her husband
did not work, but opened accounts in her name and did not pay those debts. Applicant
did not support her claims with any documentation. Likewise, she claimed that she
would pay her debts as soon as she is able to do so. There is no information in the case
file that suggests she has contacted any of her creditors or made any debt payments.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
3
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
4
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information supports the allegations in the SOR. The facts established
herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). At age 26, Applicant already has a long history of
unresolved indebtedness. Despite an earlier discharge of debts in bankruptcy, she has
incurred more unpaid debt that remains unresolved. In response to the Government’s
concerns stated in the SOR and in the FORM, Applicant has provided nothing on which
to base application of any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. She did not show, for
example, that, in fact, her husband is responsible for the debts in her name or that she
has contacted her creditors to somehow resolve even her modest debts. On balance,
Applicant has not met her burden of persuasion to refute or mitigate the security
concerns raised by the Government’s information.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). There is little, if any, information
in this record bearing on the whole person factors. Applicant’s financial problems are
recent and ongoing. While it is commendable that she fully disclosed her adverse
financial information, this is not enough to overcome significant doubts about her
suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest
is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the
individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
