Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-3, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-O. AE O was1
timely received post-hearing. The record closed 2 July 2015, when Department Counsel indicated no objection
to AE O.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxxxx Xxxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 14-06364
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczk, Esquire, Department Counsel
Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 23 January 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 11
May 2015 and I convened a hearing 10 June 2015. DOHA received the transcript 18
June 2015.
One of the credit cards was a business card. In his previous employment, he was essentially a subcontractor3
to a prime contractor. He used the card to purchase the materials he needed to perform his work. The card
was in his name and he was expected to pay it out of his earnings (Tr.33-34).
For which Applicant did not have medical insurance (Tr. 31-32).4
W hen Applicant lost his job, he discontinued a land line that he had in his home. The delinquent amount was5
the final bill that he was unable to pay because he was unemployed (Tr. 35).
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 53-year-old engineering
technician employed by a defense contractor since February 2014. He has not
previously held a clearance. His clearance requirement is mostly for building access.
Applicant was unemployed from February 2013 to February 2014. Before that, he was
continuously employed from October 2004 to February 2013. He lost his job in February
2013 when the company that he worked for lost the contract that employed him. He has
never married, and has no children. He is a recovering alcoholic who will have 16 years
of sobriety in July 2015 (Tr.  27).
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (GE 1-3) substantiate, and Applicant
admits 10 debts totaling $25,000. The debts consist of three delinquent credit cards
(SOR 1.a-1c),  six medical collection accounts (SOR 1.d-1.I),  and a delinquent3 4
telephone account (SOR 1.j).  Applicant settled the credit card debts, at a 63% discount,5
in May 2015 (AE A-C, N-O; Tr. 62-63). He paid the medical collection accounts at SOR
1f-1.I and the delinquent telephone account at SOR 1.j in full, in May 2015 (AE D-H). He
made these payments through a consolidation loan he obtained from his credit union.
He and the credit union seem to have overlooked the medical collection accounts at
SOR 1.d and 1.e. However, Applicant was able to settle SOR debt 1.e ($404) in June
2015 at a 70% discount, with three monthly payments of $94. He documented the first
$94 payment (AE O). According to Applicant, the credit bureaus believe that SOR debt
1.d was put on his account by mistake.
Before he lost his job in February 2013, his finances were in pretty good order.
His October 2012 credit report (AE I) lists the medical collection debts at SOR 1.f and
1.g, but his credit accounts were all in good standing, all but a handful of them with zero
balances. Applicant listed the delinquent credits on his February 2014 clearance
application (GE 1). He discussed these debts, as well as the remaining SOR debts,
during a subject interview in May 2014 (GE 2). He acknowledged all of the debts as his.
In March 2013, Applicant’s father had two major strokes and his step-mother was
diagnosed with cancer. Applicant began visiting them every weekend. This extra travel
cost him about $250 monthly. His step-mother died in January 2015, but Applicant
continued to visit his father. Applicant’s step-mother had insurance, so he did not have
any expenses related to her funeral. At the time of the hearing, Applicant’s father had
gone into hospice (Tr. 29). However, Applicant’s post-hearing submission (AE O) stated
that his father had died and was being buried in early July 2015.
 The SOR allegations are based on Applicant’s April 2014 credit report (GE 3). Applicant’s March 2014 credit6
report (AE K) shows the same numbers alleged in the SOR, except the reported balance for SOR 1.a is $100
more than reported on the April 2014 credit report. W hile Applicant’s July 2014 (AE J) and April 2015 (AE L)
credit reports contain no entry for the account at SOR 1.b, the reported balances for SOR debts 1.a and 1.c
show appropriate declines in each account’s balance. Finally, the June 2015 letters from the lender on SOR
1.a. and 1.c report the lender’s receipt of the final payment on each account as documented in AE A and C,
respectively. However, if you deduct the amount of the May 2015 payments from the reported balances in AE
L, the remaining balance reported by the lender—and noted as being potentially credited to Applicant as
income based on loan forgiveness—is the amount you would expect after doing the calculation.
3
When Applicant lost his job, he went on unemployment, with a severe decrease
in income. He did not receive unemployment the whole time he was unemployed. He
estimates that he received unemployment for about nine months (Tr. 40). He decided to
focus on his basic living expenses, so he fell behind on his credit card accounts.
However, he contacted the lender on his credit cards, but they were unwilling to work
with him while he was unemployed. Nevertheless, when he regained employment, he
worked out a payment arrangement on two of the credit cards in February 2014. He
began paying the lender $200 monthly. In March 2014, he reached a similar
arrangement on the third credit card, and began paying $100 monthly. Applicant’s credit
reports and letters from the lender broadly confirm these claims.6
Applicant also went to his credit union to obtain a consolidation loan to address
all the SOR debts at once. However, the credit union would not give him a loan, as he
was just recently re-employed (Tr. 30). Nevertheless, after Applicant received the SOR,
he tried again. This time he was successful. His credit union representative pulled his
credit report, got all the creditors to send her the bills, and cut the checks to the
creditors listed in AE A-G (Tr. 36-37). This was a $10,000 consolidation loan at 9% for
48 months—a $256 monthly payment (Tr. 37, 50). His first payment is due in July.
Applicant nets about $1,178 bi-weekly, or about $2,356 most months. His
monthly expenses run slightly higher than that, and Applicant acknowledges that his
finances are mostly day-to-day or week-to-week (Tr. 47). However, those monthly
expenses include $250 monthly travel expenses to visit his father, expenses that will
certainly decrease now that his father has died. Moreover, he stated his intent to get a
second job when his father died (Tr. 49) and reiterated that intent now that his father
has died (AE O).
 Applicant’s financial problems were largely related to his year’s unemployment
from February 2013 to February 2014. However, he began addressing his debts as
soon as he was re-employed. While he was unemployed, he took steps to cut his
household expenses. The record is clear that he does not live an extravagant lifestyle.
Applicant’s friends of long-standing (AE M) consider him honest and trustworthy. They
extol his work ethic but also note his willingness to help others in need. Applicant has
not documented any formal credit or financial counseling, but the record is clear that he
knows how to get financial help from his credit union when he needs it.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;8
4
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. When Applicant lost his job in February 2013,
and remained unemployed for a year, he acquired significant debt.  However, that debt8
was limited to three credit cards, several medical bills he acquired because he had no
medical insurance, and the remaining balance on a telephone account he closed when
he lost his job. Moreover, he began to address his debts once he regained employment
in February 2014. He established a repayment plan on the credit cards as soon as it
was practicable, and attempted to secure a consolidation loan to address all his debts.
He made his agreed payments on his credit cards, and obtained a consolidation loan
from his credit union as soon as it would extend him credit.
           Under his current plan, Applicant has settled SOR debts 1.a-1.c and paid SOR
debts 1.f-1.j in full. The only debts not fully resolved are SOR 1.d, which the credit
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that9
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and10
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications11
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.12
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).13
5
bureaus are not able to confirm and SOR 1.e, for which Applicant has reached a
settlement figure and made the first monthly payment. In doing so, he converted the
$300 monthly payment he was making to his credit cards—even while having significant
additional travel expenses because of his aging and ailing parents—into a $256 monthly
payment which will become much easier to make now that he will not have the travel
expenses to contend with. Moreover, he reduced over $25,000 in delinquent debt to a
$10,000 installment loan payable over 48 months.
       
The mitigating factors for financial considerations give Applicant substantial aid.
While his financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, Applicant’s employment is
now stable; so the circumstances that caused them are less likely to recur.  Further, his9
financial problems were due to circumstances beyond his control, and he began
addressing his delinquent debts once he obtained stable employment in February
2014. He has continued to address his other delinquent debts since then.  While there10
is no evidence that Applicant has had any formal financial counseling, he obtained
guidance on how to address his debts and has clearly acted to get his finances under
control.  The remaining debt is insignificant, even if the creditor for SOR debt 1.d can11
be located. He has demonstrated the willingness and ability to address his delinquent
debts. Having addressed his other financial obligations, I am confident these remaining
obligations will also be addressed if necessary. Overall, essentially complete progress
has been made addressing his delinquent debt.12
The Appeal Board has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt
alleged in the SOR, need not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all
debts simultaneously. Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve the financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement
the plan.  Applicant’s efforts to date constitute such a plan, and his consistent13
payments reflect significant actions. I conclude Guideline F for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-j: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                                 
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
