 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-06274 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael F. Fasanaro, Jr., Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 27, 
2010. On November 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines J and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 4, 2013; answered it on the same day; 
and requested a determination on the record. On January 10, 2014, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.) 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 15, 2014, and the case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on January 16, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 27, 2014, scheduling the hearing for 
February 19, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the 
testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 27, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 2.a. He denied SOR ¶ 2.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old logistics analyst employed by a federal contractor 
since February 2010. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from October 1982 to 
October 2003, and he retired as a petty officer first class (E-6). He worked as a logistics 
analyst for federal contractors from October 2003 to October 2005 and from November 
2005 to June 2009, when he was laid off because his employer’s government contract 
expired. He worked as a retail store manager from July 2009 until he was hired for his 
current job. He received a security clearance in the Navy and has held it continuously to 
the present. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 Applicant completed the requirements for a general educational development 
(GED) high school diploma in 1984, while on active duty. He received a bachelor’s 
degree in history in June 2012 and a master’s degree in higher education in August 
2013. (AX D.)  
 
 Applicant married in March 1992 and divorced in September 1993. He married 
his current spouse in August 1994. He and his current spouse have two children, ages 
16 and 19.  
 
 In early 2009, Applicant became depressed because he felt that his marriage 
was failing, and he was experiencing work-related stress. He testified that in his first job 
after retiring from the Navy, he continued to work in a military environment. However, 
when he moved into the civilian corporate world, he had difficulty adjusting. He testified, 
“[I]n the military it is not uncommon for a supervisor to cuss or yell at people to get 
something done. And in the corporate world it is not like that.” (Tr. 44.)  
 
On March 16, 2009, while he was home alone and feeling depressed, he decided 
to make an obscene telephone call. He picked a number at random from the phone 
book. When a woman answered, he asked her for sexual favors. The woman did not 
respond, and Applicant hung up. Applicant testified that this incident was one of his 
“lowest spots.” He and his wife were not communicating, and he made the phone call 
because he did not want to “physically cheat.” (Tr. 39.) 
 
 
3 
 
About two weeks after Applicant made the phone call, he was contacted by the 
police. He admitted making the call and turned himself in on April 9, 2009. In July 2009, 
he pleaded guilty to using profane language over a public airway. Disposition was 
deferred for one year, and he was required to report to a probation officer once a month 
for a year. (GX 3; GX 6 at 6.)  
 
 On April 23, 2010, Applicant ordered take-out food at a fast-food restaurant. 
When he arrived home, he discovered that he received less food than he ordered and 
what he received was not what he ordered. He returned to the restaurant and 
demanded his money back. An argument ensued because the restaurant manager 
wanted to “make amends” with a corrected order, but Applicant insisted on a refund. 
When the store manager asked Applicant what she could do to make him happy, he 
responded that he would be happy if the restaurant burned down and they all lost their 
jobs, but he would settle for a refund. He then gave the manager his name and address 
and departed. (Tr. 38.) Applicant testified that his comment was “an immature, flippant 
remark,” and he never intended it to be a threat. (Tr. 37-38.) 
 
 On April 26, 2010, Applicant was contacted by a fire department investigator and 
informed that he was being charged with threatening to burn down the restaurant, a 
felony. The store manager also alleged that Applicant had thrown food at her. Applicant 
turned himself in and was arrested. The case was tried in June 2010. A customer 
testified that Applicant did not threaten to burn down the restaurant, and a security video 
showed that he did not throw food at the store manager. Applicant was offered an 
opportunity to plead guilty to disorderly conduct, and his attorney advised that he accept 
the offer to avoid the risk of being convicted of a felony. He pleaded guilty to disorderly 
conduct and he was sentenced to 365 days in jail, suspended, and placed on 
unsupervised probation for two years. (GX 4; GX 6 at 8.) As a result of the incident at 
the fast-food restaurant, Applicant was charged with “failure to be of good behavior,” 
because he was still on probation for the obscene phone call. (GX 5.) 
 
 Applicant promptly reported both incidents to his security manager and made 
statements to be placed in his security file. Before the June 2010 trial, Applicant had 
already begun marital counseling and anger-management counseling. He sought out a 
psychiatrist because he felt that he needed more than therapy, and he received 
psychiatric treatment from June 7, 2010, to September 25, 2012. His psychiatrist 
diagnosed him with depression and gave him a prescription for an antidepressant drug 
to control his mood swings. (GX 6 at 6.) The psychiatrist stated that Applicant did well in 
his treatment, was compliant, and demonstrated no behavioral issues during his 
treatment. (AX A.) After 2012, Applicant enrolled in the Employee Assistance Program, 
and he sees a physician every three or fourth months. He receives his prescriptions for 
antidepressants from a physician and obtains his medications through TRICARE. (Tr. 
45-46.) As of the date of the hearing, he was taking medication for depression daily. (Tr. 
50.) He testified that his marriage “is stronger than it has ever been.” (Tr. 35.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in February 2010, he reviewed and updated 
his previous SCA that was submitted in 2005. In response to Questions 22b and 22e, 
 
4 
 
asking if he had been arrested during the last seven years and if he had ever been 
charged with any offenses related to alcohol or drugs, he answered “Yes,” and he 
disclosed an arrest and conviction for driving under the influence in April 1987. He 
answered “No” to Question 22d, asking if he had ever been charged with a firearms or 
explosives offense. He did not disclose his arrest for the obscene telephone call. He did 
not list the arrest for threatening to burn the restaurant, because it occurred after he 
submitted his SCA. In a personal subject interview (PSI) in June 2010, he explained that 
he did not think about listing the obscene phone call on the SCA, because he had 
already disclosed it to his security officer ten months earlier. He denied that he intended 
to hide any adverse information. (GX 6 at 9.) His PSI statement that he previously 
disclosed the incident is corroborated by GX 2, his Joint Personnel Adjudication System 
(JPAS) Incident History.  
 
 A retired master chief petty officer considered Applicant his “right hand man” from 
2000 to 2003, while they both were on active duty. He regards Applicant as “an 
outstanding individual who stands head and shoulders above his peers in reference to 
work ethic, behavior, attitude, and appearance.” (AX C.) The deputy director of 
hazardous property management at the warehouse where Applicant works describes 
him as trustworthy, diligent, capable, and dedicated. (AX B.) A social friend, who holds a 
security clearance and has known Applicant for about 15 years, testified that he plays 
golf with Applicant every week and has never seen him lose his temper. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with a threat to burn or bomb, 
pleaded guilty to a lesser charge of disorderly conduct, and was sentenced to a 12-
month jail sentence (suspended), probation for two years, and assessed court costs 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that Applicant was summoned and charged with using 
profane language over a public airway, pleaded guilty, and was placed on probation. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b).  
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” Applicant’s arrest for a felony and two convictions establish the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
 
6 
 
offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted”). 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) are established. The obscene phone call was five years ago, 
and his argument with the fast-food restaurant manager was four years ago. Both 
offenses happened when Applicant was suffering from marital problems, job-related 
stress, and untreated depression. Those problems are resolved, making recurrence 
unlikely. He promptly self-reported after each incident. He is extremely remorseful for 
his behavior. He has continued to perform well at work and has earned a bachelor’s 
degree and a master’s degree. A dark period of his life is behind him, and it does not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his February 2010 SCA by intentionally 
failing to disclose the obscene phone call and the charge of threatening to burn the 
restaurant (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). The security concern under this guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a). (“deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .”). When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
 
7 
 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing the obscene phone call on his SCA, 
i.e., that he thought the question applied only to new arrests not previously disclosed, 
was plausible and credible under the circumstances of this case. The JPAS incident 
report reflects that he reported the obscene phone call in April 2009, when he learned 
that he had been charged, and he submitted his SCA approximately ten months later to 
the same security office. The timing of the JPAS incident report is inconsistent with 
intentional concealment of the same information on his SCA. The arrest for threatening 
to burn the restaurant occurred after Applicant submitted his SCA. I conclude that AG ¶ 
16(a) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy for 21 years, and he has held a 
security clearance for about 30 years. The obscene phone call alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
occurred during a dark time in his life that he has overcome. The alleged threat alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a was an overblown incident in which he lost his temper, and it was 
appropriately downgraded to a charge of disorderly conduct. Applicant was sincere, 
remorseful, and credible at the hearing.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
 
8 
 
Applicant has refuted the allegations of falsification and mitigated the security concerns 
based on his criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
