1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-14645 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations and personal conduct security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 23, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 29, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E 
(personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2013. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on November 13, 2013. The case was assigned to me on 
December 11, 2013. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2013, 
2 
 
scheduling the hearing by video teleconference on January 23, 2014. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call any 
witnesses, but did testify on his own behalf. He did not offer any exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 29, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h, 1.k through 1.m, 1.o through 1.r, 1.t 
through 1.u, and 1.w. He denied the remaining allegations, SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, 1.n, 1.s, 1.v, 
and 2.a. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old fuels technician, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since October 1997. He is required to retain his secret security clearance, 
which he has held since being employed by his company, as a requirement of his 
continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 16, 20-21.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1980. (Tr. 19, GE 1.) He served in 
the U.S. Air Force from February 1983 to October 1995, and was medically discharged 
with a 70% disability rating. He was a staff sergeant (pay grade E-5) with an Air Force 
Specialty Code of fuels technician at the time he separated from the Air Force. (Tr. 16-
19, GE 1.) Applicant received a two-year degree in instructional technology from the 
Community College of the Air Force in “88.” He married in July 1980, and has three 
adult daughters. Applicant has been separated from his wife since October 2011 with a 
divorce pending. His wife is employed full-time as a first grade teacher. (Tr. 18-19, 28, 
71, GE 1.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 23 delinquent debts exceeding $42,000. The debts include 
medical bills, credit card and consumer debts, a vehicle repossession, and a mortgage 
in foreclosure. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.w.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to two strokes he had in December 
2011 and February 2012, and a pipeline embolization device surgical procedure 
following an aneurysm in April 2013. He was unable to work for approximately nine 
months from 2011 to 2012, and for approximately two months in 2013. He has been 
back to work since October 2013. Applicant testified that he had “no idea” regarding the 
extent of his debts until November 2013 as a result of these proceedings. Applicant 
further advised that his mother died in 2013 and he contributed an unspecified amount 
of money for her funeral expenses. Before Applicant and his wife separated, his wife 
3 
 
was primarily responsible for paying the family bills. However, he stated that he was not 
blaming her for failure to pay his just debts. (Tr. 22-30.) 
 
During cross-examination, it became clear that Applicant has taken little or no 
action to contact his creditors, attempt to settle or dispute his debts, or otherwise 
resolve his debts. A number of debts were brought to Applicant’s attention as early as 
September 2011 when he was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator. Applicant advised the investigator that he was unaware that he had 
any financial issues as his wife handled all the family finances. He further told the 
investigator at that time that he would immediately look into his debts and if he owed 
money on any or all of his debts, he would promptly resolve them. Additionally, 
Applicant received notice of his debts when he received his March 2013 SOR and also 
when he received a copy of his September 2011 and January 2013 credit reports 
forwarded to him by Department Counsel before his hearing. (Tr. 29-63, GE 3, GE 5.) 
He has not sought financial counseling. (Tr. 68, 76-77.) As noted, Applicant did not 
submit any exhibits. 
 
Applicant testified that his net monthly income is $3,400 and he also receives 
$1,505 in VA disability. He estimates his net remainder to be “[p]robably $1,200.” His 
March 2013 personal financial statement does not reflect that he is paying any of his 
SOR creditors. (Tr. 52-63, GE 4.) Applicant was having financial problems as early as 
2008. (Tr. 73-74, GE 3.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant failed to list any of his delinquent accounts or list any adverse financial 
information when he completed his August 2011 e-QIP. Applicant claimed that he was 
unaware of any of his outstanding debts at the time he completed his e-QIP. He 
maintained throughout cross-examination that he answered the e-QIP questions 
regarding his finances to the best of his ability. Given the number of long-standing debts 
Applicant has, I do not find his explanation to be credible. (Tr. 64-68, GE 1.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant did not submit any character evidence.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
4 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, e-QIP, OPM interview, and SOR response.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are numerous, recent, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. Despite having been put on notice of the Government’s concerns regarding his 
finances, he has done nothing to address those concerns. He appeared at his hearing 
poorly prepared and gave all appearances of having disengaged from the process. His 
medical problems discussed supra were circumstances beyond his control, but he has 
not acted reasonably. As noted, Applicant has made no effort to address his debts even 
after they were brought to his attention.1  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false answer on 
his security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
required information on his August 2011 security clearance application. As noted, I do 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
7 
 
not find Applicant’s explanations to be credible. Having had the opportunity to listen to 
Applicant’s testimony and observe his demeanor, I do not accept his explanation that he 
was unaware of his debts and answered the questions on his e-QIP regarding his 
financial status to the best of his ability.2 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guidelines F and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s military service in the Air Force from 1983 to 1995 and employment 
as a Government contractor from 1997 to present weigh in his favor. He is a law-abiding 
citizen and contributes to the national defense. Apart from his SOR debts, there is no 
evidence to suggest that he is not current on his day-to-day expenses. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. June 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
                                                          
2
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
8 
 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).   
 
However, Applicant’s failure to address his debts in any meaningful manner since 
they were brought to his attention as early as 2011 during his OPM interview precludes 
a favorable decision. Given his background, his failure to recognize the importance of 
regaining an acceptable level of financial responsibility is disappointing. Additionally, I 
do not accept Applicant’s explanation regarding the falsification of his security clearance 
application allegation. His lack of candor undermines the security clearance process. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated 
financial considerations or personal conduct security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.w: Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraphs 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
