                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
        ------------------------------------                   )         ISCR  Case No.  11-15121      
                                                                   )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant does
not mitigate security concerns regarding his personal conduct. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case
On June 5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why the DOD could not make the preliminary
affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and DOD
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. This action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 20, 2013, and requested a
decision be made without a hearing.  At the Government’s request, the case was
converted to a hearing proceeding. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2014,
and was scheduled for hearing on February 19, 2014. The hearing was convened on
that date. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on February 27, 2014.  
Procedural Issues 
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with a probation report. For good
cause shown, I granted Applicant seven days to supplement the record. The
Government was afforded three days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Appellant
supplement the record with a DD Form 214 and two certificates of achievement. I
admitted the exhibits as AEs A and B. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) falsified his electronic questionnaire
for investigations processing (e-QIP) of November 9, 2006, by omitting his 1981 felony
child molestation and sexual conduct charge; (b) falsified his e-QIP of October 5, 2011,
by omitting his 1981 felony child molestation and sexual conduct charge; and falsified
material facts in his October 24, 2011 interview with a DOD investigator, by denying his
1981 felony child molestation and sexual conduct charge.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations. He claimed
he did not know his 1981 charges were part of his arrest and court records.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old interior mechanic for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first spouse in July 1976 and divorced her in November
1986. (GE 1) He had one child and two stepchildren from this marriage. (GEs 1 and 3-5)
Applicant remarried in April 1989 and has two children and one stepchild from this
marriage. (GE 3)
Arrest history
Introduced to drinking in high school, Applicant consumed alcohol regularly
during his Navy enlistment and thereafter until he quit drinking altogether in 1986. (GE
5; Tr. 43) In April 1981, Applicant was arrested and charged with child molestation (a
3
felony) and sexual conduct. Preceding his arrest, he was caught by his wife in their
bedroom fondling his eight-year old stepson and performing oral sex on him. (GE 5; Tr.
47-48) 
Following the April 1981 incident, Applicant turned himself in to an unidentified
counselor, who, in turn, reported him to the city’s local police department. (GE 5)
Applicant then turned himself into the police department, who detained him for 24 hours.
Police released him on his own recognizance. Later, he was charged with felony child
molestation and sexual conduct. (GEs 3 and 5) To what extent alcohol was a
contributing factor to the incident is unclear. (GE 5; Tr. 45-46)
When Applicant appeared in court to answer the child molestation and sexual
conduct with a minor charges, he pled guilty to the sexual conduct with a minor charge
(a felony) as charged. (GE 5; Tr. 29, 32, 42) The court then placed him on supervised
probation and assigned a counselor. His counseling regimen included alcohol, family,
and group counseling and lasted about two years. (Tr. 28, 42-43) Applicant’s court-
ordered probation terms included vacating the family home for 13 months and 13
months of supervised probation. (GE 5; Tr. 34) 
Applicant remained concerned whether over his sexual conviction would remain
a part of his court records once he completed his probation conditions. According to
Applicant’s account, his probation officer assured him his arrest and conviction would be
expunged from his court records once he completed his counseling requirements. (Tr.
28, 57-58)  Applicant could not cite to any specific reasons, though, for expungement
action in his case. And without any documentation to verify his claims, his expungement
claims cannot be accepted and adopted. Although he advised his parents of the
incident, he did not disclose his arrest and conviction to his employer. (GE 5) 
During his 13-month exclusion from the family home, Applicant remained
separated from his spouse. He returned to the family home following his 13-month
separation and resided there for a couple of years before separating from his wife and
divorcing her in 1986. (GEs 1, 2, and 5) 
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete e-QIPs in November 2006 and October 2011, Applicant
disclosed his alcohol-related offenses, but omitted his 1981 felony child molestation and
sexual conduct incident. (GEs 1 and 3) Applicant attributed his omissions to his belief
that the charges and conviction had been expunged and no longer appeared in his court
and police records. (GE 5; Tr. 28-31, 56-58) When questioned by Department Counsel
whether he read the prefatory comments to question 23, he indicated that he had not.
(Tr. 59-61) Question 23 asks for arrest and conviction details regardless of whether the
underlying incident, or incidents, was expunged from the pertinent public court records.
(GEs 1 and 3)  
4
Whether Applicant’s omissions of his 1981 felony child molestation/sexual
conduct charges and sexual conduct conviction were the result of a justifiable
misunderstanding or a deliberate attempt to conceal an embarrassing incident from his
employer and the Government must be determined based on a consideration of all the
surrounding circumstances. Pertinent facts in assessing intent and motive include
Applicant’s (a) an acknowledged preference to omit the 1981 incident if he could legally
justify the omissions; (b) his concealment of the incident from his employer; and (d)
most importantly, his omission of the incident despite the absence of any relied-on
instructions for completing the e-QIP without disclosing the 1981 incident. (GE 5; Tr. 30-
31) Inferences are warranted that the omissions were carefully weighed and were
knowingly and wilfully made.        
Shortly after completing his October 2006 e-QIP, Applicant was interviewed by
an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). (GEs 4 and 5) Believing the
1981 incident had been expunged from his court and police records, Applicant declined
to disclose the 1981 incident to the interviewing agent. 
When interviewed by another OPM agent in October 2011, he was again asked
about any other arrests and charges not previously disclosed. (GE 5; Tr. 3-31)  He
answered in the negative. (GE 5; Tr. 30-31) Only when confronted with the 1981
incident did Applicant acknowledge the charges and disposition. In this interview, he did
not disclose a guilty plea or conviction. (GE 5) When questioned at hearing about
whether he pled guilty to the charges, he indicated that he pled guilty to the sexual
misconduct charge, a felony.  (Tr. 28-30)      
                              
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements from friends and co-workers who
have worked with him and are familiar with his character background. Nor did he
provide any performance evaluations or evidence of charitable and civic contributions to
his community. Applicant did furnish his military service records. His service records
consisted of a DD Form 214 and two certificates of achievement. (AEs A and B) 
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued,
revoked, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
5
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2©.
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered  together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
        Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
6
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. 
“[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  And because
all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the national interest, the burden of
persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis
Applicant is an interior mechanic employed by a defense contractor. In two
separate e-QIP applications he omitted a 1981 child molestation/sexual conduct arrest
and charges, and a sexual conduct conviction. In an OPM interview that followed his
2006 e-QIP application he failed to disclose the 1981 child molestation/sexual conduct
incident.  Only after he was confronted in an ensuing OPM interview following his 2011
e-QIP application did he disclose the 1981 incident.
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his (a) omissions of his 1981 child
molestation/sexual conduct arrest and charges, and conviction on sexual conduct
charges, in the e-QIP applications he completed in 2006 and 2011 and (b) his continued
failure to disclose the 1981 incident in ensuing OPM interviews until confronted with the
incident by the agent who interviewed him in 2011. By omitting his 1981 child
molestation/sexual conduct arrest and charges, and sexual conduct conviction, in official
security clearance applications and follow-up OPM interviews until confronted, Applicant
failed to furnish potentially material background information about a serious felony
offense that was needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his
security clearance eligibility.    
7
Both DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” and DC ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative,” apply to Applicant’s
situation. Each of these disqualifying conditions may be considered in evaluating
Applicant’s 1981 arrest, charges, and conviction. 
When first asked about his arrest history in a follow-up interview with an OPM
investigator tasked to investigate Applicant’s arrest history in a 2006 interview, Applicant
stayed with his story and declined to disclose his 1981 child molestation/sexual conduct
arrests and charges, and ultimate conviction on the sexual conduct charge. For so long
as he believed the 1981 arrest/charge and related sexual conduct conviction was deleted
from public records, he did not want to disclose it to DOD and OPM investigators.
Applicant’s disclosures that resulted from questions asked of him in a follow-up
2011 OPM interview (over five years after he completed his 2006 e-QIP) do not meet the
prompt, good-faith requirements of MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with
the facts.” His prompted answers to questions posed by the OPM agent who interviewed
him in October 2011 cannot be fully reconciled with the prompt, good-faith requirements
of MC ¶ 17(a). And none of the other mitigating conditions covered by Guideline E apply
to Applicant’s situation. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s withholding of
material information about his 1981 child molestation/sexual conduct arrest and charges,
and ultimate sexual conduct conviction, in the e-QIPs he completed, the answers he
provided in his ensuing OPM interview, his interrogatory responses, and his hearing
testimony, his explanations and the timing of his corrections are insufficient to
convincingly refute or mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15).
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding his omissions of his 1981 child
molestation/sexual conduct incident in the 2006 and 2011 e-QIP applications he
completed, and in the OPM interviews that followed until confronted, his imputed
knowing and wilful omissions are neither refuted nor mitigated.
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted responsible, good-faith efforts to provide accurate background
information to the Government in the 2006 and 2011 e-QIP applications he completed.
While military service is recognized and commended, it is not enough to meet security
eligibility requirements. Applicant’s omissions were material and precluded him from
meeting the conditions of demonstrated trust and reliability necessary to satisfy minimum
security eligibility requirements under Guideline E.
8
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a-1.c. 
       Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E:    AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through and 1.c:    Against Applicant
          Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
