1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11–15193
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s drug use was not recent and is not likely to recur. He was not
arrested for drug possession as alleged, and he has severed all ties with his friends who
used drugs. The security concerns raised by his use of illegal drugs are mitigated. His
request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On May 6, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for his
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, which included his responses to interrogatories from Department of
 See DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended, Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended. See also Directive, Section E3.1.1.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
2
Defense (DOD) adjudicators,  it could not be determined that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.2
On May 21, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed by Guideline H (Drug
Involvement).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without3
a hearing. On September 17, 2013, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on October 3,4
2013, and was notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. The record
closed after Applicant failed to submit any additional information within the time allowed.
The case was assigned to me on April 9, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that between October and
December 2008, Applicant used cocaine about three or four times, and used marijuana
once, while working as a civilian overseas (SOR 1.a); that in December 2008, Applicant
was arrested by foreign law enforcement after he and some of his co-workers
purchased cocaine, that U.S. Army law enforcement found a small amount of marijuana
at his residence, and that he resigned from his job after his arrest (SOR 1.b); and that
the conduct alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b occurred while Applicant held a security
clearance (SOR 1.c).  Applicant admitted SOR 1.a and 1.c. He denied SOR 1.b.
(FORM, Item 4) In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 42 years old and has been employed as an aircraft mechanic since
1998. He has been employed by defense contractors since March 2007. He has worked
for his current employer since March 2009, but submitted his eQIP while working for a
previous employer. He received a secret level security clearance in June 2008.
Applicant is a high school graduate and has never been married. (FORM, Items 6 and
8)
After receiving his clearance, Applicant was assigned to work for several months
at an overseas U.S. Army installation. He and his co-workers were provided quarters at
the installation. In October or November 2008, Applicant and a co-worker went out
drinking at a local bar. Applicant drank but did not become intoxicated. At one point that
evening, his co-worker produced a small amount of cocaine and offered some to
Applicant. Applicant inhaled a single small spoonful of cocaine through his nose. During
 Directive. 6.3.5
3
October and November 2008, this conduct was repeated three or four times. Applicant
never bought or possessed cocaine. (FORM, Items 4 and 7)
In December 2008, Applicant’s co-worker was arrested by local police when he
tried to buy cocaine. Applicant and other co-workers were subsequently interviewed by
Army Criminal Investigation Command (Army CID) about possible drug involvement.
During questioning, Applicant volunteered that he had purchased two marijuana
cigarettes in October 2008. He had smoked one when he bought it. When questioned
by Army CID, he still had one at his quarters. The marijuana cigarette was retrieved by
Army CID during a consensual search of his quarters. No charges were filed against
Applicant. (FORM, Items 4 and 7)
After Army CID questioning, Applicant disclosed what had happened to his
employer and offered to resign. His supervisor recommended he not resign until the
Army finished its investigation. Nonetheless, Applicant resigned in January 2009, and
returned to the United States. He averred in his November 2011 interview that he
wanted to get away from co-workers who were using illegal drugs. (FORM, Item 7)
In March 2009, Applicant was hired by his current employer. He since has
deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan for work in support of military aviation. He has also
been promoted to a maintenance manager position. Applicant’s only other drug
involvement was during his senior year of high school when he smoked marijuana with
varying frequency until June 1989. He has not used cocaine or any other illegal drug
since November 2008. He  regards his 2008 drug involvement as an unusual and
“stupid” lapse in good judgment. (FORM, Item 7)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
4
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it7
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to9
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant used cocaine about three or four times between October and
November 2008. He also used marijuana once during that time. He held a security
clearance while engaged in this conduct. This information raises a security concern
articulated at AG ¶ 24, as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
5
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition) and 25(g) (any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance).
By contrast, Applicant has not used illegal drugs in more than five years. His use
was infrequent, and he no longer associates with his former co-worker who provided
him the cocaine. Applicant acknowledged that he had also purchased and used a small
amount of marijuana around the same time as his cocaine use. But he willingly
disclosed his marijuana use to authorities and, subsequently, to his employer. Applicant
did not have to resign when he did, but he wanted to get away from a circumstance he
knew was inappropriate. He regrets his 2008 drug use as a “stupid” mistake. His current
circumstances show he is productive in the workplace and there is no further indication
of illegal drug use.
All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence.
On balance, I conclude Applicant is not likely to use illegal drugs in the future, and that
his past drug use does not reflect adversely on his current judgment and
trustworthiness. The security concerns about his drug use are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available information
suggests Applicant’s involvement with illegal drugs can be ascribed to a brief period of
indiscretion Applicant’s drug use was not recent and is not likely to recur. He was not
arrested for drug possession as alleged, and he has severed all ties with his friends who
6
used drugs. The security concerns raised by his use of illegal drugs are mitigated. His
request for a security clearance is granted. His circumstances have changed and there
has been a sufficient period of abstinence from which to conclude Applicant is not likely
to again use drugs. A fair and commonsense assessment of this record shows the
Government’s security concerns are mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
