 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12252 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Corey Williams, Esq. 
 
 
April 25, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to nine creditors in the approximate amount of $243,062. He has acted 
responsibly with respect to his debts by resolving all of his delinquencies. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 15, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 3, 2013 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
12, 2014, scheduling the hearing for March 27, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE I) and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6, and they were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
R, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits and on March 31, 2014, 
Applicant presented five additional exhibits marked AE S through AE W. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE S through AE W and they were admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 9, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since 1999. He served in the Navy from 1971 to 1991 and achieved the 
rate of E-7. He has held a security clearance since he was in the Navy, without incident. 
He is married and is a college graduate. (GE 1; Tr. 29-34, 52-56.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted nine creditors in the 
approximate amount of $243,062. Applicant admitted all of the debts listed in the SOR 
subparagraphs, with explanations. His debts are found in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a creditor for two accounts; a delinquent credit card in 
the approximate total amount of $19,344, and a debt consolidation loan in the amount of 
$35,000, alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e. The creditor consolidated 
Applicant’s debts and received a judgment against him for the total amount of $55,735 
in August 2007 as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. The writ of execution was filed in 
November 2007, creating a new entry for the same debt on Applicant’s credit report, 
which is identified in SOR allegation 1.c. Applicant satisfied the judgment in June 2013 
for approximately “$15,000 to $20,000.” Applicant provided an “Acknowledgement of 
Satisfaction of Judgment” issued by the Court as proof these debts are resolved. (GE 6; 
AE A; AE U; Tr. 34-35, 39, 62-63.) 
 
 Applicant had an additional account with this creditor in the amount of $2,140, 
identified in SOR subparagraph 1.h, which was not consolidated in the judgment. 
Applicant accepted a written settlement offer from this creditor. He submitted a payment 
of $856.47 to satisfy this account on March 25, 2010. This debt is resolved. (AE C; Tr. 
48-49.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on another credit card in the amount of $19,498, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g. The creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant 
in the total amount of $22,974, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.b. Applicant settled 
the debt to this creditor in June 2013. He was issued an “Acknowledgement of 
Satisfaction of Judgment” that showed he resolved this debt in full. This debt is 
resolved. (AE B; Tr. 41-42, 66.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has also resolved his remaining two SOR listed debts identified in 
subparagraphs 1.f and 1.i, delinquent accounts in the amounts of $13,138 and $19,498, 
respectively. He provided documentation from both creditors showing he settled the 
accounts for less than the full balances. (AE L; AE M; AE N; AE O;  Tr. 46-50.) 
 
 Applicant’s SOR-listed debts are attributable to his wife’s gambling in 2005. She 
drained their resources and took cash advances on credit cards to fund her gambling 
habit. Applicant estimates that she lost approximately $150,000 gambling in that year. 
He frequently traveled for work and she gambled when he was away. She hid her 
losses from him. He did not discover her gambling losses until 2006. At that time, he 
was unable to effectively manage their financial obligations and his accounts became 
past due. He slowly paid off the debts as he could afford the negotiated settlements. 
When Applicant became aware of his wife’s gambling habits, he closed their joint 
accounts. He began taking his wife with him on all of his business trips. He monitors his 
credit for new accounts and negative entries several times per month. He gives his wife 
$1,000 per month for spending money. He admits that his wife still gambles, but that it is 
on a limited basis. She has not incurred large gambling losses since 2005. He believes 
the precautions he has put in place have been successful in limiting her gambling and 
his exposure to financial difficulties. (GE 2; Tr. 36-38, 40, 51-52, 60-62, 70.) 
 
 In 2001, Applicant completed on-line financial counseling to help him understand 
his debt and how to resolve it. He created a budget that he utilizes and he currently lives 
within his means. Applicant has a monthly income of $4,144. After his monthly 
expenses are paid, he has a net remainder of $3,004. He has $40,000 saved and 
assets totaling $4,130,836.1 No new recent delinquencies have been incurred. (AE S; 
AE T; Tr. 32-34, 40, 46, 67.) 
 
  Applicant presented eight letters of recommendation from colleagues and 
friends. They recognized Applicant for his outstanding performance at work. They noted 
that he was reliable. Applicant has received commendations from his employer for his 
outstanding professionalism. He testified that he was awarded Good Conduct Medals, 
and the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, during his 20 years of military 
service.  (AE H; AE I; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
1 Applicant, along with his six siblings, owns a large property in another state that they inherited from their 
father. They are in the process of listing that property for sale. Applicant estimates his share of the 
property totals $4,000,000. 
 
4 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are applicable in this case:   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern. 
 
 Applicant became delinquent on a significant number of financial obligations in 
2006, after his wife lost $150,000 gambling. He was unable to settle the delinquent 
accounts until 2013. While all of those debts have now been satisfied, the Government 
established that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations from 2006 to 
2013 and that his financial problems were linked to his wife’s gambling in 2005. The 
Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s gambling problem occurred nine years ago and has not 
recurred due to Applicant’s careful monitoring of their finances.  He has acted 
responsibly and made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors by contacting each of his 
creditors and satisfying his debts. Similar circumstances are unlikely to recur since 
Applicant has taken significant steps to closely monitor his wife’s gambling. Applicant 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. All of the above mitigating conditions 
apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by his colleagues who wrote letters in support of Applicant. He performs 
well at his job. He served in the Navy, honorably, for 20 years. He has never had a 
security violation, though he has held a clearance for over 40 years. His financial 
difficulties are attributable to his wife’s irresponsible gambling and he has acted 
responsibly by repaying his debts and closely monitoring his wife’s gambling. No new 
debts have been incurred. There is little likelihood of recurrence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
   
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
