 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12683 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
I, psychological conditions. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline I, 
psychological conditions. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Appellant answered the SOR on January 6, 2014. Department Counsel 
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 12, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on April 7, 2014, by video-teleconference. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through E, 
and they were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 15, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. She is a high school graduate and is one credit from 
receiving her bachelor’s degree. She intends on completing the class this summer when 
the course is offered. She was married from 1999 to 2003 and from 2004 to 2011, both 
ending in divorce. She has two children ages ten and seven. Applicant served in the 
Navy from 2001 to 2006, attaining the rank of E-5. She was honorably discharged. She 
has never held a security clearance.1  
 
 In 2003, after the birth of her second child, Applicant suffered post-partum 
depression. She was treated while on active duty. She had recurring symptoms in 2005. 
She was later diagnosed with bipolar disorder and in 2008 with paranoid schizophrenia. 
She has been treated with medication for these disorders.2  
 
Applicant sought treatment in 2011 because she had a feeling that someone was 
following her and she was becoming increasingly more paranoid. She also felt like 
someone was watching her. Applicant reported to her psychiatrist, that she had been 
hearing other people, and she could not understand what they were saying, but she 
would occasionally answer them. She felt, at the time, her symptoms were out of 
control. Her doctor diagnosed her with paranoid schizophrenia, with acute exacerbation, 
and placed her on medication.3  
 
As part of the security review process, DOHA requested a psychological 
evaluation by a mental health professional retained by the government. The certified 
psychologist diagnosed Applicant with a psychotic disorder and a schizoaffective 
disorder. She continued to experience auditory hallucinations and paranoid ideations. 
The report noted that Applicant struggles with her symptoms. Applicant indicated that 
she dealt with the symptoms by pushing through in order to get her work done and care 
for her children despite her psychiatric problems. The psychologist noted that she 
clearly suffers from serious psychiatric problems. He opined that “given the chronicity 
and severity of her illness it is possible she could experience periods of 
                                                          
1 Tr. 26-27, 32, 38-39. 
 
2 Tr. 27, 39-41. 
 
3 Tr. 28-31, 41-42; GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
decompensation during which she would be more cognitively impaired.” This could 
adversely affect her judgment and/or reliability in the future. He further opined that 
Applicant should remain under psychiatric care, continue taking her medications and 
seek individual counseling.4 
 
In a letter provided from the licensed medical health counselor (LMHC) who 
works with Applicant’s doctor, she confirmed Applicant began individual mental health 
therapy under her doctor’s care in January 2014. Her doctor provided a letter stating 
that she has been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder and she remains stable.5 Her 
LMHC noted that Applicant has been compliant with her medical regimen and therapy 
and has remained stable. She stated: 
 
She has made great strides combining all suggested self-help 
interventions including meditation, exercise, balanced diet, recreation, as 
well as her medication compliance and weekly therapy. Due to this on-
going dedication to her treatment plan, she is a model patient and her 
functioning in all areas of her life is excellent.6 
 
Applicant admitted that despite being under psychiatric care, taking her 
medications, and attending counseling, she continues to have symptoms. She stated 
that she understood that these symptoms could affect her judgment and reliability. 
Despite her mental health issues, Applicant stated she has been able to work full time, 
attend college, and take care of her children, as a single parent. Her parents visit her for 
six months during the year, and they help her. Her sister lives in the same city, and she 
speaks with her daily. She also has a few close friends who are aware of her mental 
health issues, and all of these people are available to her as a support system. She 
stated she understands the risk her diagnosis poses, but she has done everything to 
minimize it and functions well. She stated that she has a proven track record showing 
compliance with her treatment, and she is a reliable employee. She believes she has a 
strong moral character and has worked hard to control her illness.7 
 
Applicant provided character letters including from her ex-husband, supporting 
her strong moral character. Despite her illness, her ex-husband still trusts her with their 
daughter. He has great confidence in Applicant and believes she has strived to move 
forward in her life and overcome her many challenges. She is doing everything to live a 
normal life. 
 
Applicant provided other character letters describing her as loyal, reliable, 
dedicated, trustworthy, intelligent, strong, focused, patient, passionate, adept, 
                                                          
4  Tr. 24-26, 34-35, 41-42; GE 4. 
 
5 AE B. 
 
6 Tr. 36; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. 22-26, 31-32, 36, 42-44. 
 
4 
 
 
resourceful, motivated, responsible, a team player, a superior worker, and a role 
model.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
8 AE C. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for psychological conditions is set 
out in AG & 27:  
 
Certain emotional, mental and personality conditions can impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not 
required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g. clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised on the basis of 
seeking mental health counseling. 
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions set out in AG ¶ 28 and the 
following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; and 
 
(b) an opinion of a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant has been diagnosed by a psychiatrist and a psychologist employed by 
the U.S. Government with schizoaffective disorder. Despite being compliant with her 
medications and treatment plan, she continues to have audible hallucinations and 
paranoia that she is being followed. She appears to be an exemplary employee. She is 
attending college and raising two children as a single mother. However, the 
psychologist opined that her mental illness could adversely affect her judgment and/or 
reliability in the future. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions set out in AG ¶ 29. They are:  
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan;  
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional;  
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;  
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one 
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
Applicant is compliant in her treatment plan and despite doing everything she 
possibly can to control her mental disorder, she continues to have symptoms. Her 
condition is not temporary and continues to be a problem. She has been diagnosed with 
schizoaffective disorder by two mental health professionals. Both encourage her to 
remain in treatment, which she has done. Due to her condition, the psychologist opined 
that her judgment and reliability could be adversely affected in the future. I find 
Appellant’s mental condition has not been resolved and security concerns remain. I find 
none of the above mitigating conditions fully apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline I in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
By all accounts, Applicant is an outstanding employee, a hard worker, a good 
mother, and a good student. She was incredibly honest and forthcoming about her 
mental diagnosis. She has been proactive in addressing what she described as “this 
unforgiving” condition. She manages to be a productive person despite this condition, 
by pushing through and working toward accomplishing her goals. However, despite her 
best efforts she still has symptoms of the disease that she cannot control and that could 
affect her judgment and reliability. Therefore, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant is unable to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the psychological conditions guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
