 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 12-03912                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 12, 2011. On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 13, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 28, 2014. I convened a 
hearing on March 14, 2014, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  
 
2 
 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced two exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 and Ex. 2 and entered in the record without objection. To supplement the 
administrative record, the Government also offered a copy of the discovery letter 
provided to Applicant on January 22, 2014. I marked the Government’s submission as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and entered it in the record without objection. The Applicant 
testified, called four additional witnesses, and introduced 13 exhibits, which were 
identified, marked, and entered without objection in the record as Applicant’s Ex. A 
through Ex. M. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 25, 2014. 
 
                                                       Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations that raise security concerns under AG ¶ 9, 
Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the two allegations and provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions 
are entered as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He has been married since 2003, and he and his wife 
are the parents of three young children, whose ages are 6, 8 and 10 years. Applicant is 
a native-born United States citizen. His parents, born and raised in Germany, 
immigrated to the United States and became naturalized U.S. citizens in 1959, the year 
following Applicant’s birth. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 1; Tr. 85-86.) 
 
 As a college student, Applicant enrolled in the Reserve Officer Training Corps 
(ROTC) and earned a bachelor’s degree in accounting. He was commissioned as an 
officer in an active reserve unit in the U.S. military, where he served for six years. (Ex. 
1; Tr. 87-88.) 
 
 In 1983, Applicant accepted a position with a federal law enforcement agency. In 
1986, Applicant transferred to an individual ready reserve military unit. He received an 
honorable discharge in 2003. (Ex. H; Tr. 88-89.) 
 
  Applicant also served in two other federal law enforcement agencies. He was 
first granted a security clearance in 1990. He retired from federal civilian service in 
2008. During his federal service, he received certificates of appreciation and 
recognition, and he carried out responsible federal law enforcement work. He seeks 
renewal of his security clearance now as a federal contractor. ( Ex. 1; Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. 
D; Ex. E; Ex. F; Tr. 100-101.) 
 
 Early in his career, in about 1989, Applicant earned a master’s degree in 
international finance. He envisioned working for a company overseas. He learned that 
as the child of German-born parents, he could claim dual citizenship and acquire a 
German passport. He thought having a German passport would make it easier for him 
to obtain employment someday in Europe. Later, when his children were born, he 
thought it might be helpful for them someday to have German citizenship.  (Tr. 99-101, 
110; Ex. 2.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant acquired a German passport in 1990. He renewed the passport in 2000 
and in 2010. His current German passport will expire in 2020. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 101, 
109-111.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had informed federal 
investigators of his dual citizenship with Germany during a polygraph examination in 
2005. At his hearing Applicant reiterated this information. He stated that he could not 
recall whether he reported at that time that he possessed a German passport. He was 
not aware that possessing a foreign passport raised security concerns with his 
employer. He stated that he had never used his German passport for travel or for 
business. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 101-103, 112-113.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified and stated that, in her opinion, Applicant was always 
loyal to the United States. His affinity for Germany was cultural, she observed, and 
related to his heritage as the only child of German immigrants. She stated that Applicant 
wanted to share his German heritage with their children, and in order to enrich their 
understanding of Germany, Applicant enrolled the children in Saturday German 
language classes. In the summer of 2013, Applicant and his family visited Germany 
together for the first time, she reported. Applicant used his U.S. passport on the trip. 
Applicant’s wife reported that she had never seen her husband use his German 
passport for travel. She further observed that Applicant kept the passport in a locked 
box in their home and only took it out of the box to show to their children. (Tr. 64-66.) 
 
 In colloquy with Department Counsel, Applicant appeared to believe that 
possessing a German passport conferred dual citizenship: 
 
 Department Counsel:  And how did you expect that your 
possession of a German passport would help your children with possible 
employment in Germany or anything of that nature? 
 
 Applicant: Well, let’s . . . it has changed. My understanding is, at 
least by German law, is that it can get passed to your children, having 
that. 
 
 Department Counsel: Citizenship, correct? 
 
 Applicant: I guess that, Yes. I mean, a passport would mean dual 
citizenship. Yes. 
 
 Department Counsel: Okay. But you don’t have to have a German 
passport to have German citizenship, correct? 
 
 Applicant: No, I don’t . . .I don’t know. I don’t know that answer. 
 
(Tr. 111-112.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he was willing to relinquish his 
German passport. He also stated that, in December 2013, he attempted to relinquish his 
passport to the security office at the federal agency where he is assigned as a 
contractor. However, the agency security official told Applicant that the agency had no 
facility to store the passport. He advised Applicant to contact the security officer at the 
company that employed him as a contractor. (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Because he appeared to believe that his German passport conferred dual 
citizenship with Germany, Applicant was initially reluctant to surrender it. However, after 
consulting with his attorney, he surrendered his German passport to his facility security 
office approximately one week before his hearing. At his hearing, he testified that he 
had no intention of retrieving his German passport from the facility security officer. (Ex. 
A; Tr. 114-116.)  
 
 In addition to Applicant’s wife, three individuals, all former law enforcement 
officers, testified on Applicant’s behalf. One former colleague, who has also been 
Applicant’s friend for over 20 years, testified that he respected and relied upon 
Applicant’s judgment and integrity when they worked together. (Tr. 24-31.) 
 
 The second former colleague testified that he met Applicant in 2000 at a law 
enforcement conference. Later, the two men worked together in 2003-2004 and again 
from 2006 to 2008.  At one time during their professional association, the witness was 
Applicant’s supervisor. Since 2008, the witness and Applicant have had a personal 
friendship. The witness praised Applicant’s “impeccable honesty,” loyalty to the United 
States, trustworthiness, and integrity. (Tr. 32-41.) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor also testified as a witness. He stated that he had 
supervised Applicant for 3½ years. He described Applicant as a team leader who is very 
serious, focused, mature, and responsible. He also praised Applicant’s judgment. (Tr. 
48-54.) 
 
 Applicant also provided 11 letters of character reference from friends, former 
colleagues, and the chairman and chief executive officer of the company where he is 
employed as a government contractor. All of the letters emphasized Applicant’s 
outstanding character, integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness. (Ex. M.)  
   
                                                          Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
5 
 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, acquired German citizenship at birth 
through his parents’ German citizenship. In approximately 1990, he took action to 
 
7 
 
 
acquire a German passport through his German citizenship, and he renewed his 
German passport twice, once in 2000 and once in 2010. At one time, he hoped to use 
his German passport at some unspecified future date to obtain employment in Germany 
or a European Union country. Later, when he became a father, he introduced his 
children to German culture and the German language to increase their future 
educational and employment opportunities. Applicant’s acquisition of a German 
passport as a U.S. citizen raises a concern that he actively exercises dual citizenship 
with Germany. His actions raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(b). 
 
Under AG ¶ 11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶ 11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶ 11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶ 11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign 
passport might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport 
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.” 
 
Initially, Applicant’s German citizenship was a passive condition: he acquired it at 
birth as the child of German citizens. However, when he took action, as a U.S. citizen, 
to obtain a German passport, he acted in a manner indicating a preference for Germany 
over the United States. Moreover, his decision to acquire a German passport was not 
approved by his cognizant security authority. His dual citizenship with Germany, as 
expressed in his passport choice, therefore became a security concern. Accordingly, the 
mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(c), and 11(d) do not apply to the facts of this 
case. 
 
 However, at his hearing and in his answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that 
while he appreciated his German heritage, he surrendered his German passport to 
demonstrate his preference for his U.S. citizenship. At his hearing, Applicant asserted 
his mistaken understanding that possession of a German passport conveyed dual 
citizenship with Germany. I conclude that AG ¶ 11(b) applies in part in mitigation and 
AG ¶ 11(e) applies fully in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 55 
years. He has provided laudable service to his country as a military officer and as a 
federal law enforcement officer. He was credible when he testified that he believed a 
passport conferred dual citizenship. This misunderstanding led him to believe that if he 
relinquished his German passport, he would also renounce his dual citizenship, a 
condition he had possessed from birth as the son of German citizens who immigrated to 
the United States. His interest in his German heritage and the possibility, early in his 
career, of obtaining employment in Germany, led him to seek a German passport, which 
he kept for reasons of sentiment, never used, and never intended to use.  
   
 Overall, the record evidence persuades me that Applicant is mature, trustworthy, 
and capable of being entrusted with access to classified information. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the foreign preference 
adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:             FOR APPLICANT 
 
                     Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:        For Applicant 
   
                                                        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                        __________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
