 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02778  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her access to 
classified information. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen originally from Hong Kong. 
She does not hold dual citizenship with any other country and does not exhibit 
preference for the People’s Republic of China (PRC) or the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (HKSAR). Applicant has held a clearance, at various levels, since 
2005 without incident. Her relationships with family members residing in the HKSAR 
have remained unchanged since she was initially granted access to classified 
information. Applicant’s continued access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence and foreign 
preference guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR2 and requested a hearing.3 At the hearing 
convened on March 26, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE D  through F, which are also admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on April 10, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issues 
  
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the PRC, including the HKSAR. Applicant did not object to the 
request, and it was granted. The written summary, along with its attachments, is 
appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 63, is an employee of a federal contractor. She has worked as a 
translator since 2005. Before working as a translator, Applicant had a 25-year career in 
the information technology field unrelated to defense contracting or national security.5 
 
 Applicant was born in Hong Kong, while it was a British colony. In July 1997, 
Hong Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region of the 
People’s Republic of China. As an SAR, Hong Kong maintains some autonomy from the 
PRC, which the United States supports under the “one country, two systems” 
framework. However, the PRC maintains authority on foreign relations and national 
defense. The PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party. The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses 
political dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced 
confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. The PRC actively engages in acts 
of industrial espionage against the United States. The PRC also defines, by statute, 
who is considered a Chinese national and entitled to the benefits of Chinese citizenship. 
Foreign nationals seeking Chinese nationality must apply for naturalization. However, 
the Chinese National Law (CNL) was not applied in the HKSAR until July 1997. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 Applicant’s answer as included in the administrative file was missing several attachments. Applicant 
submitted a complete copy of her answer after the hearing. I have treated the non-duplicative materials 
as a post-hearing submission.  
 
3 The discover letter from Department Counsel and the letter from the Chief Administrative Judge 
regarding the Applicant’s rights and obligations in a DOHA proceeding is appended to the record as 
Appellate Exhibit (AP E) III. 
 
4 Tr. 18. 
 
5 Tr. 22, 24, 48-49; GE 1; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant has never considered herself a Chinese citizen or otherwise affiliated with the 
PRC.6  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1974 and attended college. She 
married a U.S. citizen in 1978 and became a naturalized citizen in 1982. Widowed since 
2008, Applicant has two adult children who are U.S. citizens by birth. Applicant’s 
parents, now deceased, and her four siblings are also naturalized U.S. citizens, living in 
the United States. Applicant has been a homeowner since at least 1995. She currently 
has a net worth of approximately $1 million.7 
 
 Between 1999 and 2013, Applicant traveled to Hong Kong to visit relatives: an 
elderly paternal aunt and three cousins. Applicant’s aunt never worked outside the 
home. Her three cousins are retired civil servants. Two of her cousins worked as 
teachers and the other worked as a social worker. It is unclear from the record if 
Applicant’s aunt and cousins are citizens of the PRC. Applicant also has a cousin, a 
physician, who is a citizen of Australia, who, at times, resides in Hong Kong. Applicant 
has not maintained contact with her aunt and cousins outside these visits. She does not 
provide any financial support to any of her relatives living in the HKSAR.8 
 
During her trips to Hong Kong in 1999 and 2002, Applicant traveled to mainland 
China for tourist purposes. She does not have any relatives or any other ties to 
mainland China. In order to obtain a visa to enter mainland China for those trips, 
Applicant sent her U.S. passport to the nearest Chinese consulate. This process made 
Applicant uncomfortable. In 2004, Applicant’s sister, who was living in Hong Kong, 
advised her to apply for a 10-year travel visa card. The visa card would allow Applicant 
to enter China without having to send her U.S. passport to the Chinese consulate. 
Applicant was eligible for the visa card because she was born in Hong Kong. In order to 
receive the 10-year visa card, Applicant had to have an updated Hong Kong 
identification card. For the sole purpose of obtaining the visa card, Applicant, for the first 
and only time since becoming a naturalized citizen, renewed her Hong Kong 
identification card. She then used the identification card to obtain the 10-year travel visa 
from the PRC government. Both documents expire in April 2014. On her subsequent 
trips to HKSAR, Applicant has entered the region only using her U.S. passport. She has 
not taken any trips to China since receiving the 10-year visa.9  
 
 Applicant received an interim secret security clearance in June 2005. She 
completed another security clearance application in February 2006 as part of a single 
scope background investigation (SSBI). Applicant disclosed her travel to Hong Kong 
and China, as well as her foreign relatives and contacts. She also disclosed the fact the 
she obtained the 10-year Chinese travel visa card. She was subsequently granted a top 
                                                          
6 GE 1; HE 1.  
 
7 Tr. 22, 50; GE 1-2. 
 
8 Tr. 28-29, 35, 38-41; GE 1-3. 
 
9 Tr. 26-27-44-48; GE 1-2; AE A. 
 
4 
 
secret clearance. In 2008, Applicant completed a SSBI with a full-scope polygraph and 
was granted access to sensitive compartmented information.10 
 
 Applicant completed her most recent security clearance application in October 
2011. She disclosed the same information about her foreign relatives and contacts as 
on her 2006 application. She updated her foreign travel, disclosing trips to Hong Kong in 
2007, 2009, and 2011. She also disclosed that she opened a bank account in Hong 
Kong in May 2011. The bank account allowed her access to spending money without 
having to borrow from her sister. Applicant also reported that she applied for a one-time 
payment from the Hong Kong government for HKS$ 6,000 (USD $750). The payment 
was deposited into her Hong Kong bank account. Applicant qualified for the payment by 
virtue of her birth in Hong Kong.11  
 
 Since being granted access to classified information, Applicant has reported 
each of her trips to Hong Kong to her facility security officer (FSO) and completed all 
required security briefings before and after her trips. In September 2013, Applicant 
surrendered her Hong Kong identification card and the Chinese visa card to her FSO, 
who agreed to hold the documents until Applicant no longer requires or possesses a 
security clearance. Applicant closed the bank account, which had a nominal balance, in 
2013. She donated the money she received from the HKSAR government to charity.12  
 
 Applicant traveled to Hong Kong for a final time in September 2013 to visit her 
102-year-old aunt, who died shortly after the hearing. Applicant did not attend the 
funeral and has no plans to return to Hong Kong in the future.13   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
10 Tr. 24-25, 66; GE 1-2. 
 
11 Tr. 27-28; GE 2-3; AE A.  
 
12 Tr. 22, 31-34, 52-53; AE A-B, D.  
 
13 Tr. 35-37; AE B, F.  
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Security concerns involving foreign preference arise when an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States.14 
Typically, foreign preference concerns revolve around the exercise of dual citizenship 
with another country, but that is not the case here. Applicant does not hold dual 
citizenship with any other country. She was born a British subject. In 1982, 15 years 
before Hong Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty, she became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. Applicant has never held Chinese citizenship and has not applied for 
naturalization as required under the CNL to obtain it. Applicant has never considered 
herself affiliated with PRC in any way. However, Applicant has used the fact of her birth 
in Hong Kong to obtain benefits from the HKSAR government, specifically, obtaining a 
Hong Kong identification card, which allowed her to obtain a 10-year travel visa to 
                                                          
14 AG ¶ 9. 
 
6 
 
mainland China. She also applied for and received a birthright payment from the 
HKSAR government. These actions, while they do not invoke a specific foreign 
preference disqualifying condition, could indicate a preference for the HKSAR over the 
United States. Accordingly, a general foreign preference security concern under AG ¶ 9 
has been raised, even without the applicability of a specific disqualifying condition. 
 
 However, Applicant has presented sufficient information to support a finding that 
she does not have a preference for HKSAR or the PRC over the United States.  
Applicant used her Hong Kong birthright in an attempt to avoid direct contact with the 
PRC government if she chose to enter mainland China in the future. Applicant never 
used the documents, which she obtained before working as a federal contractor, to 
enter either the HKSAR or mainland China. Applicant has also eliminated any foreign 
preference concerns by divesting herself of any potential ties to the HKSAR. She has 
surrendered her identification card and visa, which expire in April 2014, to her FSO. She 
has closed her Hong Kong bank account and donated the funds she received from the 
HKSAR government to charity.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”15 Applicant has four cousins 
who are residents of the HKSAR. One cousin is a citizen of Australia. The citizenship of 
the other three cousins is not established by the record. Given the treatment of the PRC 
toward its residents, as well as the country’s reputation for being an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence, these relationships create heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, and coercion.16  
 
Although, a prior grant of a security clearance does not preclude the federal 
government from considering  whether to revoke it at a future date,17 it is worth noting 
that the foreign influence concerns raised in the present adjudication are based on the 
same information favorably adjudicated in 2005, 2006, and 2008. There has been no 
appreciable change in Applicant’s relationships with her cousins. She continues to 
maintain infrequent and limited contact with them.18 Their circumstances as residents of 
the HKSAR seem unchanged since Applicant’s 2008 background investigation. There is 
no evidence to suggest that any of Applicant’s family members are in positions that 
raise a conflict of interest or serve as a source of exploitation or vulnerability for her.19 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 6.  
 
16 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
17 See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 99-0-0511 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2000) at 8; ISCR Case No. 99-0481 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 29, 2000) at 5. 
 
18 AG ¶ 8(c).  
 
19 AG ¶ 8(a), (b). 
 
7 
 
Applicant has resided in the United States for 39 years. Her siblings and children are all 
U.S. citizens. Applicant’s life is rooted in the United States. As such, Applicant is 
expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant does not have divided 
loyalties between the United States and HKSAR or the PRC. Applicant was born in 
Hong Kong while it was still a British colony. She came to the U.S. and became a citizen 
before it reverted to the PRC in 1997. British culture and capitalism influenced her as a 
youth, not the Chinese mainland dominated by the Communist Party. Since applying for 
eligibility for access to classified information in 2005, Applicant has consistently reported 
her foreign contacts, any potential foreign interests, and all of her foreign travel. She 
has demonstrated a high level of security consciousness in the almost 10 years she has 
been granted access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence    For Applicant   
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                                              
 
 
 
______________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
