 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01046 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F and 
Guideline E. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2013, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 20, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
who received it on January 31, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He chose not to 
submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on April 9, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. With regard to 
the Guideline E allegations, Applicant admitted that he provided incorrect information, 
but denied that he intentionally provided false information. Those admissions are 
adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He is married and has two adult children from an earlier 
marriage. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since August 
2010. He did not list any degree or diploma within the last ten years. He worked for a 
private security firm (WS) from 1990 to 2009. He was fired from that position because 
he tested positive for anabolic steroids. He was unemployed from April 2009 to July 
2009. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 1982 to 1986 and received an 
honorable discharge.1  
  
 The SOR lists three delinquent debts, the first, a credit card account in the 
amount of about $13,960 (SOR ¶ 1.a), the second, a credit card account in the amount 
of $14,799 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and third, a residual debt from a motorcycle repossession in 
the amount of $11,317 (SOR ¶ 1.c). These debts are supported by credit reports dated 
September 2013, March 2013, and October 2011.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted when he was fired from his job with WS 
in 2009 and when his two nutritional foods stores, that he owned with a partner, went 
out of business. Without a steady paycheck, he could not make the necessary payment 
to keep his stores running. He claims that he and his business partner agreed to split 
the debts associated with the business. He further claims that he paid his share of the 
debts and that his partner filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection to include his share 
of the business debts. He did not produce documentation showing what business debts 
he paid. He provided a copy of his partners bankruptcy discharge dated November 
2011, but he did not include any schedules showing what debts were included in the 
bankruptcy. He claims that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were debts associated with the 
business that his partner was supposed to pay. The dates of last activity for these two 
debts were November and March 2009, respectively. He has made no effort to pay 
these debts, instead he has followed his attorney’s advice to let the debts proceed to 
default rather than file for bankruptcy himself so that they would fall off his credit report 
more quickly.3 
                                                          
1 Items 5-6. 
 
2 Items 1, 7-9. 
 
3 Items 4, 6, 9. 
 
3 
 
 
 Because of his job loss, Applicant could not make the payments on a motorcycle 
(SOR ¶ 1.c) and after consulting his attorney, defaulted on the underlying debt and 
allowed it to be repossessed. The date of last activity for this account was December 
2009. There is no evidence that he has made any payments toward this delinquent 
debt.4 
 On September 8, 2011, Applicant completed his security clearance 
questionnaire. He answered “no” to questions concerning whether he had any 
repossession, voluntary or involuntary, and whether he had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. As the above-stated 
facts reveal, his answers were not true. In October 2011, during his personal subject 
interview, it was only after the investigator specifically confronted Applicant with the bad 
debt information that he acknowledged the debts and provided additional information 
about them. Applicant claimed that his failure to affirmatively acknowledge the above 
stated debts on his security clearance application was an unintentional error on his 
part.5  
 Applicant claims he is now in a stronger financial position. His personal financial 
statement indicated he has $923 net remainder after his expenses and debt payments. 
This does not account for any payments toward the SOR-related debts. There is no 
evidence he sought financial counseling, other than seeking advice from his attorney.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4 Items 4, 6-9. 
 
5 Items 5-6. 
 
6 Items 4, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. Additionally, his abdication of his 
responsibility for these debts casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant provided 
evidence that he was fired from his job, lost his business, and was unemployed for 
about four months, which contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for 
this mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior 
in light of the circumstances. He consulted an attorney about his business debts who 
advised him to default on the debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant failed 
to present evidence of financial counseling, and there is no clear evidence that 
Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control because the debts 
remain unpaid. There is no evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to pay the 
remaining debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
6 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire…. 
Applicant admitted he discussed his debts with an attorney who advised him to 
default on the debts rather than file for bankruptcy. I find it difficult to believe he would 
unintentionally fail to list this information on his application considering the debts were 
listed as delinquent since 2009. I also factor in that Applicant did not reveal this 
information to the investigator until he was specifically confronted with it. After 
evaluating all the evidence, I find Applicant deliberately provided false information 
concerning his repossession and charged-off accounts. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following as potentially applicable: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Falsification of material information on a security clearance application is a 
serious offense and calls into question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past military 
service, his business loss, and his unemployment. However, he has not shown a track 
record of financial stability. The record lacks evidence that Applicant has made an 
overall good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
