 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 12-01301 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on October 10, 2011. On June 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on July 8, 2013. She answered the SOR in writing 
between July 8 and 16, 2013, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on July 16, 
2013. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 30, 2013, and I 
 
 
2 
 
received the case assignment on November 21, 2013, after the case was transferred 
from another administrative judge who was assigned the case originally on October 21, 
2013. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 20, 2014, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on March 18, 2014. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 
through 6, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and submitted Exhibit A without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on March 27, 2014. I granted Applicant=s request to keep the record open until April 
4, 2014, to submit additional matters.  On March 31, 2014, she submitted Exhibits B to 
E, without objection. The record closed on April 4, 2014. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in && 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 
1.h, 1.r, 1.u, 1.x, 1.aa, 1.cc to 1.ee, 1.mm to 1.pp of the SOR, with explanations. She 
denied the factual allegations in && 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i-1.q, 1.s, 1.t, 1.v, 1.w, 1.y, 1.z, 1.bb, 
1.ff to 1.ll, and all three allegations in ¶ 2 of the SOR. She also provided additional 
information to support her request for eligibility for a public trust position.   
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2003. It was discharged in 
November 2003.This bankruptcy occurred after her second divorce . (Tr. 26; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant was married and divorced twice, from 1993 to 1994, and then from 
1998 to 2000. She has two adult children who do not live with her. Applicant lives alone 
and commutes to work by public transportation. She does not own a vehicle. Applicant 
earns about $40,000 as a customer service representative for a military health care 
provider. She actually works for a contractor who places people with vision problems in 
certain government positions. (Tr. 24, 25; Exhibits 1, B-E) 
 
Applicant has several medical problems which make employment for her difficult. 
She is legally blind, has had diabetes for the past 23 years, macular degeneration in her 
eyes, eye cataracts for which one eye was operated upon in 2011 (her right eye having 
the better vision now), oral gum problems for which she had surgery two weeks before 
the hearing, and diabetic retinopathy. Applicant’s medical bills for prescription medicines 
and doctor appointments usually totaled over $900 a month until recently. (Tr. 40, 50, 
71-77; Exhibits 1, B-E) 
 
As stated, Applicant earns about $40,000 working for the contractor who places 
visually handicapped people in government employment. She nets about $2,200 
monthly. Her apartment rent is $645, groceries $160, utilities $175, cable $60, internet 
$16, and medical expenses of $300 now because she got insurance in her state of 
residence on the new insurance exchange. Those expenses total $1,356. Applicant 
claimed she now had about $650 of disposable income monthly with which to pay her 
 
3 
 
delinquent debts. Her new health insurance purchased from an exchange provided her 
with lower out-of-pocket expenses for her medications. (Tr. 41-47; Exhibits 1-6, A)  
 
Applicant was unemployed for two periods in the past six years. She took care of 
her grandson from August 2007 to October 2007. She worked for an insurance 
company from September 2007 to August 2010. She was fired from that job when her 
absences for medical appointments or tardiness for the same reason became too many. 
She knew in that time period she was losing her eyesight and was seeking medical 
diagnosis and treatment for the condition. She found it difficult to see the computer 
screen she used at her workplace because of her vision loss. (Tr. 20-23; Exhibits 1-3)  
 
Applicant has 41 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. One additional allegation 
pertains to the 2003 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. These debts total $44,704. Of those debts, 
four are owed for her student loans. Those debts amount to $26,371. The remaining 
balance owed is $18,333 on 37 individual debts. (Tr. 26-63; Exhibits 1-6)  
 
Applicant’s student loans for her associates’ degree in business management are 
listed in the SOR in Subparagraphs 1.l to 1.o. They are being paid at the rate of $200 
monthly, which is deducted automatically from Applicant’s checking account. She 
started the repayment process in January 2014. The most recent credit report shows 
these loans are current. These debts for $26,371 are being resolved. (Tr. 37, 38; 
Exhibits 2-6, A) 
 
Applicant stated she consults with an attorney whom she pays $70 monthly to 
investigate each remaining debt and to try to arrange a payment plan, or have the debt 
removed from her credit record if proved invalid. She did not submit any documents to 
support this assertion. Applicant contends that she should have her debts repaid in 
three-to-five years. (Tr. 46-51, 74) 
 
Applicant’s 37 remaining debts include apartment leases, for which she did not 
pay the agreed amount and she was sued, with judgments against her resulting in debts 
of $1,799 in 2012 (Subparagraphs 1.b), $1,625 in 2006 (Subparagraph 1.c), and $407 
from 2006 (Subparagraph 1.h). Applicant paid some money on those debts years ago 
but nothing recently. These debts remain unresolved. (Tr. 28-30; Exhibits 1-6) 
 
Applicant had a truck repossessed when she could not make the payments on it 
due to her unemployment. The truck was sold and the balance owed was reduced to a 
judgment of $3,867 in 2006 (Subparagraph 1.d). This debt remains unpaid. (Tr. 30; 
Exhibits 1-6) 
 
Applicant has a variety of debts that are unresolved. They include six medical 
accounts (1.e, 1.i, 1.x, 1.aa, 1.oo, 1pp); five delinquent debts owed to landlords for 
apartments she vacated (1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, 1.p); six debts for videos or books purchased 
for which payment was not made (1.u, 1.v, 1.y, 1.z, 1.cc, 1.dd); six utility debts owed 
 
4 
 
(1.f, 1.s, 1.t, 1.w, 1.ee); one debt owed to a pizza company (1.g); eight delinquent 
checks owed to one pizza restaurant totaling $446 (1.bb, 1.ff to 1.ll) that she denies 
because she never eats pizza or orders from that restaurant; and five debts owed to 
other creditors (1.k, 1.q, 1.r, 1.mm, 1.nn). Most of these debts are small amounts of less 
than $100 each. The debts she does not recognize Applicant disputes. However, she 
does not have any copy of a letter or email sent to a credit reporting agency, creditor, or 
collector disputing the debt in writing. Nor does she have any response from any credit 
reporting agency, creditor, or collector concerning the disputed debt. Applicant stated 
she did not have the money to pay these debts previously, but now with her monthly net 
income remainder of $650 and with the information her attorney gives her she should be 
able to pay the debts in the next three to five years. (Tr. 30-63, 73; Exhibits 1-6) 
 
Applicant claims her identify was stolen in 2004 when she lived in another state. 
She has fraud alerts on her bank accounts. She contends that the pizza restaurant bad 
checks and some other debts are the results of that identify theft. She did examine the 
checks written with her name and on her purported account and claims they are clever 
forgeries of her signature. (Tr. 58-61, 72, 73) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in November 2011. They 
discussed her delinquent debt. She told the investigator that she would investigate the 
debts and pay the debts she validly owes. In 2014 at the hearing she had only worked 
to resolve her student loans starting in January 2014. She explained she did not have 
the money in the past years to pay these debts. Her medical expenses consumed most 
of her income because of her preexisting conditions. (Tr. 40, 41; Exhibit 2) 
 
Applicant completed and executed her e-QIP on October 10, 2011. Applicant 
failed to identify any of her SOR-listed debts in her responses to the questions in: 
 
“Section 26. Financial Record; Delinquency Involving Enforcement: In the past 
seven years have you had a judgment entered against you; or had a lien placed against 
your property for failure to pay taxes?”  
And, in the section pertaining to “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts; Have 
you had any debts turned over to a collection agency in the past seven years”; 
 and “Have you been over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”;  
 and “Are you currently over120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”  
  
Applicant testified she did not know why she answered, “No,” to these questions 
when she had all the delinquent debts listed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR due and owing. 
She knew about the apartment lease debts and her truck repossession before she 
completed the e-QIP. She knew she had a $218 tax lien filed against her in October 
2009, which she paid in December 2009.  She did state that she denied the debts 
because she did not know they were her debts. Now she has hired an attorney to 
attempt to assist her in resolving the debts or clearing them from her credit record. 
 
5 
 
However, she admitted to knowledge of most if not all the debts for the past three-to-
four years. (Tr. 12, 46, 64-68; Exhibits 1-6) 
 
 Applicant is visually impaired. One of her character letters states she was hired in 
September 2010 under a special program for training and employing blind and visually 
impaired individuals. Applicant works in a call center. In the past three years Applicant’s 
service was characterized as dependable, dedicated, and she provides timely and 
accurate information to personnel seeking data on their insurance policies and 
programs. Another supervisor stated in a separate letter that Applicant works hard every 
day and comes to work regularly. A third supervisor reported that Applicant comes to 
work even when she is weak and tired. She is dependable. Applicant earned two “Triple 
Crown Awards” from her employer, when many employees never earn even one such 
award. Her work is consistently rated as “Excellent.” (Tr. 71, 77; Exhibits B to E) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as Asensitive positions.@  (See 
Regulation && C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  AThe standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person=s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.@ (See 
Regulation & C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation & C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge=s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG & 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the Awhole-person concept.@ The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
6 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
7 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately 41 delinquent debts 
totaling $44,704, plus a previous bankruptcy in 2003. She has not contested or 
otherwise addressed her delinquent accounts listed on her credit reports, except for her 
four student loans of $26,371 that are now current with her regular $200 monthly 
payment. Her remaining delinquent debts total $18,333. She has $650 left now after 
satisfying her monthly obligations and claims she can start to repay some of her debts. 
She had a past inability to address her debts. She has an overall “history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) are disqualifying. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”1 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
 
8 
 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”2 
Applicant’s ongoing decision not to address her debt in a meaningful manner reflects 
poorly on her current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Future delinquencies are likely to recur, given her past 
performance. Applicant’s current assertion that she now has enough money to start to 
repay her delinquent debts is not supported by any objective action on her part.   She 
has not established that the problem  is being resolved or is under control, or that she 
made a good faith effort to repay her remaining delinquent accounts. Applicant 
contends the pizza restaurant debts are not hers, but she introduced no documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of her dispute and she failed to provide evidence of any 
action to resolve the debts. None of the mitigating conditions were sufficiently 
established by the record evidence with respect to any of her debts and the financial 
history of which they are symptomatic. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to list her SOR-listed debts on her e-QIP. Applicant clearly knew 
she had debts, such as the obligations on her previous apartment that had not been 
resolved. Yet, she willfully chose not to include them on the e-QIP. This behavior 
indicates questionable judgment and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
9 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to 
correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no information that indicates she 
was ill-advised in completing her e-QIP. Falsifying information is a serious offense and 
Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
Further, she fails to take responsibility for her actions. She has not provided information 
in this record to show that she has met her burden of proof for her personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant=s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant=s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): A(1) the nature, 
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; 
(4) the individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.@ Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
 
10 
 
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is working hard to support 
herself even with her multitudinous medical disabilities. She continues to apply herself 
and gets high ratings from her supervisors. However, none of her past actions in the last 
seven years shows she acted responsibly regarding her delinquent debts. Applicant’s 
income has been adversely affected by her vision problems. She is legally blind. The 
present position she acquired through an organization that helps visually affected 
persons gain productive employment. These conditions impeded her ability to repay her 
debts. However, they do not excuse or explain a person’s spending of money that she 
did not have the income to repay within a reasonable amount of time. 
 
On the Personal Conduct issue, nothing in Applicant’s testimony or on her e-QIP 
explains why she did not disclose on the form her financial difficulties, even in the 
additional comments section at the end of the questionnaire. She could still decide, 
regardless of every challenge she had, to truthfully disclose the delinquent debts even 
in a general fashion to put the government on notice there was a problem, in which it 
should delve as part of its background investigation. Applicant did not make those 
disclosures as required and as she swore on the e-QIP that she provided truthful 
answers to all questions.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her Financial 
Considerations and Personal Conduct guideline categories.  
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.k:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l to 1.o:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.p to 1.pp: Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
11 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
