 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04554 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 27, 2013, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 25, 2014. The FORM was mailed to 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant who received it on March 11, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted 
exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into the record without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on April 24, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is divorced and has two children from an earlier 
marriage. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since January 
2009. He received an associate’s degree in 1998 and is currently working towards 
completion of his bachelor’s degree. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 
1983 to 2004 and retired with an honorable discharge.1  
  
 The SOR lists three delinquent debts, the first, a credit card account in the 
amount of about $3,164 (SOR ¶ 1.a), the second, a credit card account in the amount of 
$8,217 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and the third, also a credit card account in the amount of $15,380 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). These debts are supported by credit reports dated December 2011 and 
June 2013.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted from his divorce in February 2008. He 
was ordered to pay alimony in the amount of $850 monthly, child support in the amount 
of $850, and the court awarded his ex-wife $980 monthly as her one-half share of his 
military retirement pay. He said he was left with receiving $650 monthly as his 
retirement pay. In 2010, Applicant gained custody of his two children. He continued to 
pay child support to the state where his divorce was filed and an accumulated balance 
of about $30,000 resulted. Applicant claims his ex-wife received about one-half of that 
amount and he received about $16,000. He claims he paid current accounts with this 
money without providing any specific documentation. He used the credit cards listed 
above to pay for living expenses after his divorce. He fell behind in making the 
payments and they eventually became delinquent.3 
 
 Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s financial history also includes owing 
federal income taxes for tax years 2008 through 2010 for which he has established a 
payment plan of $170 monthly on a balance of $11,000. Under this plan the debt will be 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 1, 7-8. 
 
3 Items 5-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
paid in July 2016. In December 2007, his residence was foreclosed for failing to make 
the monthly payments. The property was sold by the lender and no deficiency resulted.4 
 
 Applicant entered into a debt consolidation plan in August 2013. The plan only 
encompasses two of the SOR debts (¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). Applicant has been making 
monthly payments of $272 since October 2013 towards the payment plan, but so far 
none of those payments have been disbursed to the creditors. He claims he has 
telephonically contacted the collection agency responsible for SOR debt ¶ 1.c, but that a 
representative refused to talk with Applicant unless he gave the representative his bank 
account number, which Applicant refused to do. This account is unresolved.5 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicated he has a $151 net monthly 
remainder after his expenses and debt payments. This does not account for any 
payments toward the SOR-related debts.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
4 Items 5-6. This information was not specifically alleged in the SOR and will only be used in assessing 
Applicant’s whole-person qualities.  
 
5 Items 5-6; AE A-B. 
 
6 Items 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant provided evidence that in 2008 he went through a divorce, which resulted in 
significant financial hardship, and contributed to his financial problems. However, in 
order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible 
behavior in light of the circumstances. He waited until August 2013 to arrange a debt 
consolidation plan, which did not include the highest balance debt. There is no evidence 
that payment towards any debts have been made under this plan. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. Applicant presented some evidence of financial counseling by 
contacting a debt consolidation company, but there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or under control because the debts remain 
unpaid. There is some evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to pay the SOR 
debts ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past military 
service, and his divorce. However, he has not shown a track record of financial stability, 
to include his past federal tax debt, his foreclosure, and the unpaid SOR-related debts. 
Although some mitigation is present, his record lacks sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
