                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-04004
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
History of the Case
On September 24, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 22, 2013, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on March 5, 2014, and responded to the FORM within the time
permitted. In her response, she claimed payments on several of the listed debts and
2
progress on most of the remaining debts. I admitted the submission with eight
attachments as Item 12.  The case was assigned to me on April 9, 2014.    
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 21 delinquent debts. These
debts exceed $16,500. (Item 1)
In her response to the SOR (Item 4), Applicant admitted the allegations covered
by subparagraphs 1.a-1.n and 1.p-1.u, and denied the allegations covered by
subparagraph 1.o of Guideline F.  She offered explanations for most of the listed debts.
She claimed she was making payments to a number of the listed creditors (i.e.,
creditors 1.b, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.s-1.u) She claimed she assigned one of the listed
accounts (creditor 1.o) to a third-party who “is working to pay off the debt.” She claimed
to have scheduled monthly payments with two of the listed creditors (i.e., creditors 1.j
and 1.k) With several of the listed creditors, she claimed she is still attempting to
contact them to make scheduled payments (i.e., creditors 1.e-1.i, 1.l, 1.p, and 1.q).
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old technical support employee of a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are adopted as a relevant and material finding.  Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in February 1993 and divorced her husband in August 2001.
She has two children from this marriage, ages 19 and 21. (Item 6) 
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps February 1992 and served four years in
the inactive reserves  before receiving her honorable discharge in February 1996. (Item
5) She earned credits in computer technology from a computer learning center in 1996.
(Item 6)
 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2005 and 2013, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts,
mostly in her name. These debts involve past due rental payments, credit cards,
medical accounts, telephone accounts, and other assorted debts. Applicant disputes a
number of them, claiming she does not recognize them as her debts. (Items 4 and 6)
She attributes most of them to her ex-husband, her former boyfriend, and her sons. 
Applicant’s credit reports reveal that most of the reported delinquent accounts
covered in the SOR were opened after 2006 in her name (individually). Her reported
debts are comprised of the following: Creditor 1.a ($3,111);  creditor 1.b ($852); creditor
1.c ($2,012); creditor 1.d ($173); creditor 1.e ($358); creditor 1.f ($774); creditor 1.g
($837); creditor 1.h ($442); creditor 1.i ($561); creditor 1.j ($57); creditor 1.k ($344);
creditor 1.l ($855); creditor 1.m ($117); creditor 1.n ($121); creditor 1.o ($3,906);
3
creditor 1.p ($412); creditor 1.q ($781); creditor 1.r ($412); creditor 1.s ($152); creditor
1.t ($102); and creditor 1.u ($156). Together, her listed delinquent debts total more than
$16,500. (Items 2, 4, and 6-12) 
Among the debts Applicant continues to dispute are her debts with creditor 1.a
over reported back rent and with creditor 1.o over a reported deficiency balance on a
repossessed SUV vehicle. She claims she gave her creditor 1.a landlord two months
notice on her vacating her apartment in 2011. (Items 4 and 6) The landlord denied ever
receiving a notice from Applicant, and remains in dispute with Applicant over whether
she owes any back rent to creditor 1.a. Other listed accounts disclosed to her in her
interview with an agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in January
2012 were previously unknown to Applicant. (Items 4 and 6) When confronted with the
debts listed in Applicant’s credit reports, Applicant committed to addressing the debts
and paying off those debts she could identify as her own.
In 2004, Applicant and her former boyfriend (2002-2007) co-signed for the
purchase of an SUV for approximately $25,551 with creditor 1.o. (Items 9 and 10) Their
monthly car payments were $650. By 2005, Applicant and her boyfriend could no longer
make their car payments, and the vehicle was repossessed. (Items 4 and 6) They
separated in 2007; her boyfriend assumed possession and payment responsibility; and
Applicant never received any demand notices from the creditor. (Items 4 and 6)
Believing that the vehicle was essentially her former boyfriend’s vehicle and his
payment responsibility, she never inquired of her boyfriend as to the vehicle’s status, or
made any attempts herself to resolve the deficiency issue. Applicant continues to
dispute a reported deficiency balance with creditor 1.o. 
Since responding to DOHA interrogatories in June 2013, Applicant has contacted
a number of her debts, including creditors 1.a-1.d, 1.j-1.k, 1.m-1.n, and 1.s-1.u. (Items 3
and 12)  Her efforts have yielded pay-offs of her 1.d, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.s, and 1.t
debts. These payoffs exceed $1,000. She documented payment plans in place with
creditors 1.b ($50 a month) and 1.u ($25 a month) And she identified one listed debt
(creditor 1.r) that is a duplicate of another listed debt (creditor 1.h). (Item 12) To date,
though, she has not documented any payoffs or payment plans in place with any of the
remaining creditors: some identified (i.e., creditors 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.I, 1.p, and 1.q)
and some not (i.e., creditors 1.g, 1.h, and 1.l). 
Applicant claims to have reached out to creditors 1.f-1.i and 1.p-1..q for more
information on the debts, and for payment instructions on the debts that are validated.
Pending input from these creditors, she has initiated no payment steps.  And while she
claims to be making monthly payments to creditors 1.a and 1.c in her post-FORM
submission, she provided no payment documentation. So, as the record now stands,
Applicant’s listed debts with her remaining creditors remain unsatisfied and unresolved.
Together, these unresolved debts exceed $14,000 (inclusive of the deficiency debt
covered by creditor 1.o). 
Applicant enrolled in credit counseling in March 2014, and with the help of her
creditor counselors, she hopes to be able to identify the remaining listed debts in the
SOR. (Item 12) To date, she has been unable to make any additional documented
4
progress in identifying the remaining creditors listed in the SOR. Without any additional
evidence of disputed debts or payment initiatives with her remaining creditors she is
able to identify, her payment initiatives with these disputed and unidentified creditors
cannot be properly assessed. 
In her most recent personal earnings statement, Applicant reported net monthly
income of $5,200, monthly expenses of $2,700, monthly debts of $350, and a net
monthly remainder of $2,350. (Item 6) Despite a positive net monthly remainder,
Applicant has made only minimal progress with her listed debts. While claiming to have
a repayment agreement in place with creditor 1.a, she provided no documentation of
the $292 monthly payments she committed to making to the creditor.                              
                                       
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf.
Nor did she provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
5
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. (AG, ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
6
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s listed delinquent debts and her
limited display of payment initiatives over an eight-year period dating to 2005.
Applicant’s recurrent problems with managing her finances over a considerable period
of time reflect lapses of judgment in working with her creditors.
Between 2005 and 2013, Applicant encountered recurrent problems in paying
the debts she owned (mostly individually) and working with her creditors to identify
reported debts once she became aware of them. Most of the reported debt
delinquencies she attributed to her ex-husband, her former boyfriend, and her sons.
Several of the listed debts she has since acknowledged as her own and addressed
them with payoffs and payment plans. But many of her reported debts remain
unresolved and without the necessary documentation to identify them or establish direct
payment plans with the individual creditors. 
With a sizeable net monthly remainder, Applicant could be expected to have
achieved more progress in identifying and paying off the debts covered in her credit
reports. It is less than clear why she has not been able to make more payment progress
with her listed debts once they were made known to her in her 2012 OPM interview.
Applicant’s actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c)
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in cases
involving debt delinquencies.  
While potentially extenuating, Applicant’s accumulation debts associated with
her ex-husband, former boyfriend, and sons are not sufficiently developed to definitively
affix sole payment responsibility with any of them. Most of the listed debts were
reported individual accounts opened by Applicant after 2007, and well after she split
with her ex-husband and former boyfriend. As a result, neither MC ¶ 20(a), “the
behavior happened a long time ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” nor MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions
that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly,” have any more than partial
application to Applicant’s situation. 
Applicant’s finances have been marked by recurrent periods of instability for
many years and show insufficient signs of stabilizing in the foreseeable future.  While
7
she has addressed some of her smaller debts, she has made no cognizable progress in
paying off her larger ones. 
Full mitigation is difficult to establish with Applicant’s history of minimal follow-
through with payment initiatives with her available income sources. Her financial history
reveals little attention to exploring payment initiatives before the issuance of the SOR.
While an applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR, the applicant
needs to establish that there is a credible and realistic plan to resolve identified financial
problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR Case
No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  While Applicant’s addressing of her smaller
debts this past year is encouraging, her efforts to date do not make much headway with
her larger debts.  More is needed of Applicant with the monthly income sources she
currently has available to her.
While prospects are somewhat promising for resolutions of some of Applicant’s
remaining debts, it is by no means certain. Applicant’s attempts to resolve her debts
individually with her creditors merit partial application of MC  ¶  20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  She
may benefit, too, from the recent counseling program she is pursuing and take
advantage of MC  ¶  20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control.” But for lack of any strong track record of payment initiatives, these mitigating
conditions warrant only partial application to her situation. Applicant’s repayment efforts
to date do not meet minimum mitigation criteria and are not enough to mitigate security
concerns over her finances.  
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reveals recurrent lapses of
judgment associated with her accumulation of delinquent debts over the past seven
years since separating from her ex-husband and former boyfriend. Her repayment
efforts over the past year, while encouraging, are not enough to demonstrate a strong
track record of debt repayment.
Without any evidence of work performance or community and civic contributions
to weigh and consider, there is little evidence in the record by which to make a whole-
person assessment of Applicant’s accomplishments in her business and personal life.
Overall, Applicant’s efforts to date are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements
imposed by the AGs governing her finances.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a, 1.c, 1.e-1.i, 1.l, and            
                  1  . o  -  1  . q  :                                                 Against Applicant 
8
Subparas. 1.b, 1.d, 1.j-1.k, 1.m-1.n, 
       and 1.r-1.u:    For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
