 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03604 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 17, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing in this case on February 19, 2014, and 
the hearing was held as scheduled on March 11, 2014.  
 
 
2 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called 
no witnesses, and offered no exhibits. The record was left open until March 25, 2014, to 
provide Applicant an opportunity to submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted 
documents that were marked as AE A though K and admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old logistics assistant who works for a defense contractor. 
He has worked for that employer since September 2011. He graduated from high school 
in 1981. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from February 1982 to February 
1986, in the National Guard from April to August 1986, and on active duty in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from August 1986 to April 2003. He retired from the Marine Corps as a 
gunnery sergeant (E-7). He has been married for 23 years and has one stepson who is 
25 years old. He has held a security clearance without incident since about 2002.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had seven delinquent debts totaling about 
$50,082. In his answer, Applicant admitted each allegation. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant’s military specialties were motor vehicle operator and motor transport. 
After retiring from the Marine Corps, he worked part time as a bus driver from April 2003 
to May 2004 and then fulltime as a delivery driver from May 2004 to December 2009. 
Since December 2009, he has worked fulltime for successive defense contractors as a 
transportation coordinator/logistics assistant on a military installation. In that position, he 
is responsible for moving people or items.3 
 
 Applicant disclosed that he had delinquent debts on his Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated December 19, 2011. In responding to 
interrogatories on September 16, 2013, he stated: 
 
My delinquency started as a result of bad decisions and just plain bad 
luck. From family medical issues to automobile problems. I was the only 
source of income at the time, I am not going to sit here and make up 
excuses, this has been a long hard road but my intention is to pay off 
every last one of my creditors. The figures look high but with the help of a 
third party I hope to reduce some of the penalties that was enforced.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-5, 16-20; GE 1; AE E. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. at 16-20; GE 1.  
 
4 GE 2.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born overseas and still has family members living in her 
native country. Around the time Applicant was retiring from the military, some of his 
wife’s family members experienced medical problems, and she began sending them 
money. He did not know how much money his wife sent to her relatives, but that 
transfer of money contributed to his financial problems. Around that same time, he 
experienced car problems and other financial setbacks. When he could not keep up with 
these debts, creditors began charging him interest and penalties. He communicated 
with the creditors in an attempt to resolve these debts, but he could not afford the 
amounts they were demanding. He stated that he argued with his wife about her 
sending money to her relatives and that she now understands the limits. He indicated 
that she is still sending money to them, but sends money she makes working as a 
waitress. She has been working in that job for the past five years.5 
  
 Applicant’s credit reports reflected that he had a $14,802 charged-off account 
that was opened in September 1994 and had a date of last activity of April 2008 (SOR 
¶1.a); that he had a $7,481 charged-off account that was opened November 1992 and 
had a date of last activity of May 2007 (SOR 1.b); that he had a $20,000 collection 
account that was opened in October 2003 and had a date of last activity of January 
2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c); that he had a $2,516 charged-off account that was opened in 
October 1993 and had a date of last activity of May 2008 (SOR ¶1.d); that he had a 
$4,111 charged-off account that was opened in January 1995 and had a date of last 
activity of July 2007 (SOR ¶1.e); that he had a $750 charged-off account that was 
opened in July 2008 and had a date of last activity of September 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.f); and 
that he had a $1,422 charged-off account that was opened in September 2000 and had 
a date of last activity of May 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.g). He did not provide any proof of 
payments toward these debts or any repayment arrangements for them.6 
 
 In about 2008, Applicant also became delinquent on an account that was not 
listed in the SOR. At one point, this debt was past due about $3,000. During his Office 
of Personnel Management interview on January 11, 2012, he stated that he entered into 
a repayment agreement with this creditor and it would take about two years to pay off 
that debt. He testified the monthly payments of $125 were deducted from his military 
retirement pay. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a letter from the creditor 
that indicated the last payment was received in March 2014 and that debt was paid in 
full.7  
 
 I found Applicant to be a credible witness. At the hearing, he testified that he  
takes full responsibility for his financial problems and that he was not making any 
excuses. He indicated that he was committed to paying off his delinquent debts. He 
stated that, now that he paid off the debt not listed in the SOR, he intended to take that 
extra money and start paying off the smaller debts listed in the SOR. He also indicated 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 21-25, 32-33, 37-38, 44-48; GE 1, 2.  
 
6 Tr. at 41-42; GE 3, 4.  
 
7 Tr. at 36-41; GE 2; AE J, K.  
 
 
4 
 
that he intended to consult with a financial advisor on how best to attack the larger 
debts. In this regard, he stated, “I know it is going to take a while. But my main goal is to 
just get all of these accounts back to zero.” In his post-hearing submission, he also 
provided a letter from the collection company handling the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.f that 
indicated the account was closed and noted a request was submitted to the credit 
reporting agencies to delete this debt.8 
 
 Applicant testified that he received financial counseling when he first started 
incurring delinquent debts. On September 16, 2013, Applicant submitted a Personal 
Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected his total net monthly income was $4,510, that 
his total monthly expenses were $1,855, and that his monthly debt payments were 
$985, which left him a net monthly remainder of $1,670. He lives in a rented property. 
His PFS listed no assets. He testified that he had $1,700 in a checking account and 
$500 in a saving account. He did not have any money in a retirement account. He has 
two cars and a motorcycle. Both cars are paid. He owes about $15,766 on the 2008 
motorcycle. He testified that he used his net monthly remainder to pay bills and basic 
expenses. He has filed and paid his state and federal income taxes as required. He 
received state and federal refunds for tax year 2012. He anticipated receiving tax 
refunds for 2013 and stated he would apply those refunds to his debts.9 
 
 Besides the SOR debts and the past-due debt that was paid in full, Applicant has 
not had any other delinquent debts in the past five years. His credit reports reflect that 
he had 20 open or closed accounts that he paid as agreed.10 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals for the past two years reflected that he “far 
exceeds” expectations, the highest category. Three years ago his performance 
appraisal reflected he “frequently exceeds” expectations, the second highest category. 
He was described as a true professional who was head and shoulders above his 
peers.11 
 
 A Marine Corps major recommended Applicant for a security clearance. The 
major has known him for almost four years. The major stated that Applicant embodies 
the Marine Corps values of honor, courage, and commitment and is without doubt 
someone he could place his faith in and can stand behind.12 
 
 Applicant’s manager stated that Applicant “has intense loyalty, determination to 
excel, integrity, high moral standards, enormous potential and all-around professional 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 26-27, 36-; GE 2.  
 
9 Tr. at 27-36; GE 2.  
 
10 Tr. at 41-43; GE 3, 4.  
 
11 AE B-D.   
 
12 AE F. 
 
 
5 
 
skills. Applicant was his highest-rated employee. Applicant’s pastor stated that Applicant 
is an asset to the community.13  
 
 In the military, Applicant was awarded six Good Conduct Medals, a Navy and 
Marine Corps Commendation Medal, three Navy and Marine Corps Achievement 
Medals, two Army Achievement Medals, and other military decorations. 14   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
13 AE G, H.  
 
14 Tr. at 19-20; AE E. 
 
 
6 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he did not satisfy over an extended 
period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant takes full responsibility for his financial problems. All of his delinquent 
debts date back to 2007 and 2008. They occurred at a time when his wife was sending 
money to her relatives overseas. He confronted his wife about making those gifts. She 
has since obtained a job as a waitress and now sends her relatives money that she 
earns. Since this change, Applicant has not incurred any new delinquent debts in the 
past five years.  
 
 Applicant paid in full one delinquent debt. He made those payments over the 
past two years. He testified credibly that he is committed to resolving the remaining 
debts. He recently contacted one of the remaining creditors who decided to delete the 
debt from his credit reports. It may take Applicant a substantial period to resolve the 
remaining debts. However, he demonstrated that he will not disregard these financial 
obligations, but will act responsibly in resolving them.   
 
 While Applicant’s financial problems are multiple and ongoing, they occurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and that do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. AG ¶ 20(d) partially 
applies. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served over 20 years on active duty in the military and retired in pay 
grade E-7. He has held a security clearance without incident for about the past 12 
years. He is a valued employee who received the highest performance ratings from his 
supervisor. He was sincere and candid at the hearing. He established that he is a 
reliable and trustworthy individual. Although he has delinquent debts, he is committed to 
resolving them. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
