                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 12-04806
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Attorney At Law
April 4, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(E-QIP) on December 9, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On November 26, 2013, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on December 13, 2013, and he requested
an administrative hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was
assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge on February 4, 2014.  A notice of
hearing was issued on February 6, 2014, and the hearing was scheduled for March 3,
2014.  At the hearing the Government presented six exhibits, referred to as Government
Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant called four
witnesses and testified on his own behalf.  He also presented twenty-one exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through U, which were also admitted into evidence
without objection.  The record remained open until close of business on March 10,
2
2014, to allow the Applicant to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant
submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A,
which was admitted without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on
March 12, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Applicant's Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of the California
Anti-Deficiency Statute, set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 580(b)
and  580(d), and UM Capital LLC v. Ozeran 2010 WL 685325 (Cal. App. 2d Dist. Mar. 1,
2010) and Herrera v. LCS Financial Services Corporation 274 F.R.D. 666 (N.D, Cal.
2011).  Department Counsel had no objection.  (Tr. p. 35.)  The requested documents
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.  The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 59 years old and married.  He has two Bachelor’s degrees, one
in Biology, and the other in Computer Science.  He holds the position of Computer
Systems Analyst for a defense contractor.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance
in connection with this employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
(See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated December 15,
2006; January 13, 2012; January 17, 2014; and March 6, 2014, reflect that at one time
Applicant was indebted to Bank A as set forth in the SOR, for two mortgage loans
involving one property.  Applicant owed approximately $228,994 on the first loan, and
$46,840 on the second loan, totaling over $275,000.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4, 5, and
6.)
Since 1996 Applicant and his wife have been involved in the real estate business.
Applicant’s wife testified that when her great-grandfather came to the United States as
an immigrant, he built homes and sold them for profit.  Over the years, the tradition was
passed down through the family, and she became involved in real estate investing.  In
order to diversity their retirement plan, she and her husband began to purchase rental
3
properties.  In 1996 Applicant and his wife purchased their first rental property.  She
took real estate courses at the local community college to learn more about the
business.  Since then, and before 2010, they purchased four of five more properties,
rented them out, and made a profit when they were sold.  (Tr. p. 68.)        
In May 2005, Applicant and his wife purchased a house for their personal
residence.  To purchase the property, they obtained a first and a second mortgage from
Bank A.  Applicant and his wife lived in the house (L-4) from 2005 to 2008.  (Tr. p. 70.)
During that period, Applicant spent about $23,000 in remodeling.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
R.)  In 2008, Applicant purchased another property that became his primary residence,
and he retained (L-4) as an investment.  The loans on L-4 were never refinanced.  
In 2009, with the collapse of the real estate market, Applicant's rental properties
lost significant value and were up side down.  (Applicant’s Exhibit O.)  Applicant was
forced to reduce the amount of the rents on his properties, which were significantly less
than the mortgage payments required on the property.  He was also suddenly and
unexpectedly confronted with other major costly issues.  He contends that between
2009 and 2010, he lost about $50,000 and depleted his reserves.  (Applicant's Exhibit
0.)  In 2009, it took six months to evict a tenant who was not paying rent.  (Applicant's
Exhibit B, and Tr. p. 74.)  In early 2010, one of the properties required an $8,000 septic
tank repair.  (Applicant's Exhibit C.)                                                                                   
                                   .
Confronted with this financial crisis, and the difficulties making the payments on
all of his investment properties, Applicant chose the one property with the largest
discrepancy between the payment and the rental rate, which was L-4, and tried to
obtain a loan modification.  He was told that there were no loan modification programs
available for rental properties.  He followed the financial counseling advice
recommended by the bank, in hopes of eventually getting a loan modification, but was
not successful.  (Applicant's  Exhibit N.)  At some point, Applicant could no longer afford
to make the payments  on L-4.  To prevent the property from being foreclosed upon,
Applicant tried to raise money by trying to sell another property he owned, a vacant
property, but was unsuccessful.  (Applicant's Exhibit F.)  He also tried to borrow from his
401(k) to pay the mortgage on L-4, but was prevented from doing so since there was
already a loan on the 401(k).  (Applicant's  Exhibit K.)  In 2010, foreclosure proceedings
started on the L-4 property, and it was foreclosed upon in October 2011.  (Tr. p. 85.)  
Applicant contends that the first mortgage loan on the property was settled by the
foreclosure, as the property was collateral for the loan.  Applicant's credit report
confirms this understanding.  (See Applicant's Exhibit P, and Government Exhibit 4,
page 6.)  Applicant contends that the second loan on the property was also charged off.
(See Applicant's Exhibit P, and Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant received two 1099-A's
from the lender on both the first and second mortgage.  (Tr. p. 112.)                                
       
Applicant recently contacted the bank to determine whether he could settle a
debt that had been charged off.  After numerous conversations with various individuals
there, he was advised to send the bank a letter explaining what happened, and that his
4
intentions  are to settle the debt.   (Tr. p. 92.)  Applicant submitted a copy of the letter he
sent to the bank.   (Applicant's Exhibit H.)  Applicant testified that if he owes anything to
the bank for the second loan, he will honor the agreement and settle the loan, as he has
the financial means  to do so.   (Tr. p. 93.)  Applicant  also testified that if the foreclosure
transaction itself is found  to have  tax consequences, imposing some  tax liability  on
the Applicant,  he will resolve  it.  (Tr. p. 114.)
Since L-4 was foreclosed upon, Applicant and his wife enrolled in and completed
an intensive eight week financial counseling course focusing on debt reduction, in order
to avoid future problems of this sort.  (Applicant's Exhibit Q.)  Applicant adopted,
internalized, and  is currently practicing the seven financial  principles he learned at the
financial seminar.  An example of this is in June 2013, he purchased a property with no
mortgage. He paid  for it with cash, partially from a 401(k) loan.  (Applicant's Exhibit G,
and Tr. p. 87.) His debt  reduction plan includes his present attempt to sell two of his
land parcels.  He has a five year plan and the goal is to become debt free.  (Applicant's
Exhibits I and J, and Tr. p. 98.)
Four witnesses, including a long time church associate, the pastor  of Applicant’s
church, a close  friend, and his wife, testified to Applicant's consistent good judgment,
trustworthiness, loyalty, and reliability.  These  individuals have all known the Applicant
for over ten years and see him on a regular basis.  They recommend him for a security
clearance.  (Tr. pp. 21-96.)
Applicant's personal financial statement dated February 20, 2014, reflects that
after his regular monthly expenses and mortgages on his investments are paid, he has
about $1,100 in discretionary funds left at the end of the month.  (Applicant's Exhibit J.)
He presently owns five houses, including his personal residence, and two parcels of
land.  The parcels of land are currently up for sale.  (Tr.  p. 98.)  Applicant also has
retirement accounts  with his employer.  (Applicant's Exhibit  L.)  Applicant and his wife's
current net worth is about $900,000.  (Tr. p. 96.)
Applicant's job performance appraisals for the period  from January 2011 through
2012, reflect an overall rating average of "3", which "exceeds expectations.” (Applicant's
Exhibit T.)  Applicant was Employee of the Year in 2003.  (Applicant's Exhibits S.)
Letters of recommendation, mainly from coworkers and friends of the Applicant,
attest to his high moral character, good judgment and responsible nature.  He is
considered by all to be a trustworthy individual who is well respected.  He is
recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant's Exhibit  U.)
5
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
    b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
6
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 I.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
7
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that the Applicant became delinquently indebted beginning
in 2009, when the real estate market crashed and property values plummeted to
unprecedented lows.  Without sufficient financial resources available to meet. these
unexpected expenses, one of Applicant's investment properties was foreclosed upon.
Given this situation, the question now before this court is whether the Applicant acted
reasonably and responsibly under the circumstances.  I find that he has.  Applicant
made every attempt to avoid foreclosure and, although he was not successful, he has
continued to show good judgment.  Other than the property that was foreclosed upon,
Applicant had been able to meet all of his financial responsibilities related to his other
investments.  The Applicant has inquired about the status on the second loan and has
offered to settle the loan if it is determined that he owes anything.
The legal question raised in this proceeding concerns whether the Applicant is
liable for a deficiency judgment on the L-4 property that was foreclosed upon and
returned to the bank.  As I see it, the Applicant owes nothing more to the bank.  In this
case, the Applicant's property falls withing the protection of the California Anti-
Deficiency Statute.  California Civil Procedure Code (CCP) Section 580(b) indicates that
a lender is prohibited from seeking a deficiency judgment against a borrower if he
incurred the loan for the sole purpose of purchasing the home.  There is also a
requirement that the subject property be the residence of the debtor (which it was at the
time the loan was taken out); a one to four unit property; and the money was used to
purchase the property.  This is considered a purchase money loan, and are non-
recourse loans, which means the lenders only recourse is to sell the home to pay the
money owed.  CCP Section 580(d) sets forth that if a lender sells a home under a power
of sale, contained in the mortgage or deed of trust, (trustee's sale), then he cannot also
sue the homeowner in a court of law for the deficiency.  In this case, the property
foreclosure was the bank's recourse on the loan.  Since the debt is a non-recourse debt,
its cancellation through foreclosure does not result in cancellation of debt income, for
which Applicant owes any income tax.  In the event that the bank determines that
Applicant must repay something  toward the second loan, Applicant  has expressed  the
willingness to settle the debt, and has the financial resources available.
Regarding whether there is any tax liability arising from the foreclosure
transaction, Applicant received  two 1099-A's  (Acquisition  or Abandonment  of Secured
Property) from the lender.  Applicant did not provide a 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt),
which would indicate that Applicant's debt had been cancelled and that he has no tax
8
liability.  Since Applicant did not submit a 1099-C there is an inference that he may have
some  tax liability, but even that is not definite.  In the event that there are any tax
implications, Applicant has expressed a willingness to resolve them and he has the
financial resources to do so.
Applicant has now resolved his past due indebtedness.  He has acted
responsibly and reasonably under the circumstances.  Furthermore, there is no
evidence in the record to show that the Applicant strategically arranged this loan default
for the purpose of improving his financial position.
These humbling, unpredictable, and unfortunate circumstances were isolated
incidents that will not recur.  Applicant more clearly understands that the real estate
business is quite of a gamble, and not a guarantee  of any sort.  To be involved in the
business one must hope for the best and plan for the worst.  This means one must have
sufficient financial resources available for emergencies that may arise, be it from the
economy changes, or property necessities.  In the real estate business, one must
always be prudent in decision making and be careful not to financially over-extend
yourself , even if the deal looks good.  One must carefully evaluate whether the benefit
of the investment out-weights the risk in getting involved in such a volatile business. 
Since the foreclosure, Applicant's financial situation has stabilized.  Applicant is
able to pay his bills and make the payments on his other mortgages without difficulty.
He has learned the hard way that he will no longer purchase  property by obtaining a
loan.  He understands that he must remain fiscally responsible if he is to hold a security
clearance.
Under the circumstances he has done the best he could.  He has made a good-
faith effort to resolve his past due indebtedness, and he has resolved his delinquent
debts.  He has not incurred any new debt that he cannot afford to pay and in fact has
reduced some of his expenses.  He has clearly demonstrated that he can properly
handle his financial affairs.  There is clear evidence of financial rehabilitation.  In the
event that he becomes excessively indebted again, his security clearance will be in
immediate jeopardy.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
9
debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented, including his favorable
witnesses statements, letters of recommendation, and job performance evaluations.  It
mitigates the negative effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can
have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that
the Applicant has overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
