 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-03595 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 18, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP). On November 25, 2013, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on December 8, 2013. Applicant answered the SOR 
in writing on December 10, 2013. Applicant admitted the four allegations. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
subsequently submitted a second answer that was undated. It stated that each debt in 
the SOR he affirmed and had included in a recent Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  
 
On February 26, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on February 27, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
March 5, 2014. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on April 4, 2014. I received the case assignment on 
April 10, 2014. Based upon a review of the complete pleadings and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by deleting ¶ 1.b, alleging 
Applicant owed $9,600 on a credit card. This motion was granted. The remaining three 
allegations are the subject of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. (Items 2-6) 
 
Applicant is 57 years old, married, and has two adult children. He served in the 
Air Force on active duty starting in 1976 and subsequently in the Air Force Reserves 
and Air National Guard. He retired in 2002 and receives a reserve pension monthly. His 
wife is not employed. Applicant’s monthly income according to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
documents is $7,103. He owns two houses, in two separate states. He moved to the 
second state when he found a new contractor position after being laid off from his 
previous position. He has mortgages on each home. He leased the first home for a 
while but claims he had trouble with the renters and had to evict them. He purchased 
the second house when he moved to that state with his new contractor position. The 
former residence has two mortgages totaling $177,407. The second home has one 
mortgage on it of $217,271. The total amount Applicant owes on these three mortgages 
is $394,678. His monthly payments are $2,663.24 according to his bankruptcy 
documents filed in October 2013. (Items 4, 8-15) 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant owes two delinquent debts and filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy on October 4, 2013. The first debt is for $15,833 (Subparagraph 1.a). The 
second debt is for a line of credit owed to a bank in the amount of $49,048 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
(Subparagraph 1.c). These two debts total $64,881. Applicant’s Answer states these 
debts are included in his latest bankruptcy. The second debt is clearly stated in the 
latest bankruptcy filings. The first debt is not listed under the creditor named in the SOR. 
Applicant admits these two debts.  (Items 1-15) 
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy on June 20, 1986. It was discharged in 
July 1991. He later filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on April 17, 1997. That petition was 
granted and discharged his debts in August 1997. Applicant’s third and latest 
bankruptcy was a Chapter 7 bankruptcy for about $56,000 of debts filed on July 10, 
2013. He was discharged in January 2014. His two homes are listed as secured debts 
and Applicant retained them after the bankruptcy. (Items 12-15) 
 
Applicant claims his financial problems started when his wife needed surgery and 
could no longer work. He did not supply any documents pertaining to that medical 
treatment. His latest bankruptcy petition shows she receives Social Security disability 
payments. Applicant also asserts he tried to resolve his debts using a debt management 
service. He states he paid them over $20,000 during a two year period. They did not 
resolve any of his debts and later transferred his account to a subsidiary which later 
went bankrupt. Applicant did not supply any documents or other objective information to 
verify these assertions. (Items 12-15) 
 
Applicant declared he was unemployed from June 2013 to September 2013. 
Applicant claims he was affected by the government budget cuts and layoffs. He did not 
submit any documents to support his assertion. He did not demonstrate how this short 
period of unemployment adversely affected his ability to pay his mortgages and 
delinquent debts. (Items 1-15) 
 
Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 1986 to the present, Applicant accumulated multitudinous delinquent debts 
that he removed from his credit record and did not have to pay after discharge in three 
bankruptcy actions. The first bankruptcy was filed under Chapter 13 of the U.S. 
Bankruptcy Code but Applicant does not disclose the amount of debt he repaid in that 
action. The following two bankruptcies were Chapter 7 actions, resulting in the wiping 
out of his debts. The most recent Chapter 7 bankruptcy took care of two delinquent 
debts totaling $64,881. Applicant retains $394,678 of mortgage debt on two houses he 
owns. The actions of Applicant regarding his delinquent debts since 1986 show a 
pattern of incurring financial obligations that he does not repay. He clearly demonstrates 
an inability or unwillingness to repay debts and has a long history of not meeting his 
financial obligations. These two disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past five years, 
Applicant has been unemployed three months. He failed to meet his burden of proof on 
that issue. 
 
Lastly, Applicant contends his wife’s medical problems in an unspecified time 
caused an inability to repay his delinquent debts. Applicant did not provide any 
documents to support his assertion. His pattern of bankruptcies shows he cannot 
manage his money properly. He has not acted responsibly under the financial 
circumstances he encountered since 1986.  Furthermore, Applicant failed to prove AG ¶ 
20 (b) applied because he did not submit sufficient evidence of the conditions that he 
asserted were beyond his control, and that he acted responsibly in resolving his 
delinquent debts during the time the debts were accumulating. 
 
Applicant continues to the present time to have difficulty managing his money 
and paying his debts. There is a pattern of financial mismanagement over the time of 
more than 27 years that shows poor self-control and lack of judgment. Therefore, AG ¶ 
20 (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant may have received financial counseling as part of his most recent 
bankruptcy petition, but he did not submit any proof that he completed such a course. 
Even if he had, it is clear from the totality of the evidence that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control. With his record of money management, and now having 
two houses on which he has $394,678 of debt, the problem is clearly not under control. 
AG ¶ 20 (c) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant did not initiate a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. He claims he 
paid $20,000 over two years to a debt management company that took his money but 
did not pay his creditors. Applicant does not provide any documents, such as the 
agreement with the company, proof of such payments, or a list of creditors to be paid, 
so his assertion is given no credence. AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not dispute any debts, so AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply. Nor does AG 
¶ 20(f) pertain because there is no evidence of any affluence resulting from any source, 
legal or otherwise.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts by 
payment, except in a 1986 Chapter 13 bankruptcy action. This inaction leaves him 
vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on the magnitude of his 
financial obligation. His pattern of incurring debt and not repaying it over the past 27 
years will continue based on his past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good 
judgment incurring the debts.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant 
because he is a financially irresponsible person, causing serious doubts about his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    Withdrawn  
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
