 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03479 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 6, 2013, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s 
written case was submitted on November 15, 2013. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
 
2 
 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 10, 2013. As of March 26, 2014, 
he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2014. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2009. He served in the U.S. military from 1999 to 2002 and 
the National Guard from 2002 to 2009. He was honorably discharged from the military 
and the National Guard. He has an associate’s degree, and he has taken additional 
courses toward a bachelor’s degree. As of July 2013, he was pending divorce. He has 
an 11-year-old child.1   
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $17,000, and that 
Applicant was $9,777 past due on a mortgage loan with a balance of $41,910. The 
delinquent debts range from $145 to $8,354. Applicant admitted owing the debts and 
the past-due mortgage loan, and all of the debts and mortgage loan appear on at least 
one credit report.2   
 
 Applicant developed financial problems in 2009 when he was laid off from his job. 
He was unemployed for about four months, when he started work for his current 
employer. He does not earn as much at his current job as he did before he was laid off. 
Applicant and his wife separated in 2011, which also adversely affected his finances. 
Applicant admitted that he did not handle his wife’s actions well, and he was arrested for 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), which he called “the real beginning of [his] financial 
problems.” Applicant eventually moved out of his home, with the agreement that his wife 
and her new friend would maintain the mortgage loan payments. They lived in the 
house, but they did not pay the mortgage loan.3 
 
 Applicant has not established that he has made payments on any of his 
delinquent debts. He has a number of student loans that are in deferment but will 
eventually have to be paid. He has not received financial counseling. Foreclosure 
proceedings have been initiated on his home. He plans on filing bankruptcy after his 
house is foreclosed.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 6.  
 
2 Items 4-9.  
 
3 Items 4-6. Applicant’s DWI was not alleged in the SOR, and it will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be considered in assessing the cause of Applicant’s financial problems, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
4 Items 4-9.  
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s finances were harmed by his unemployment and his separation from 
his wife. He left the marital home to his wife with the agreement that she and her new 
friend would pay the mortgage loan. They did not, and the house is in foreclosure. The 
above events were beyond Applicant’s control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant admitted that he did not handle his separation well and that his DWI 
adversely affected his finances. There is no evidence of payments toward any of his 
delinquent debts, not even the small ones. He stated that he plans to file bankruptcy 
after his house is foreclosed. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off 
debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other 
 
5 
 
responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) 
(quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I do not find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
financial problems. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to 
determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, the limited 
information in the record has not convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order 
to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
