 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-06713 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his possession and past 
use of a foreign passport. He has lived and worked in the United States for over 40 
years. He surrendered his foreign passport to his facility security officer and established 
that his preferences squarely lie with the United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). On 
December 9, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish 
his eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
On February 21, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After coordinating with 
the parties, I scheduled the hearing via video teleconference for March 21, 2014. At 
hearing, Department Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (Ax.) A – Q, which 
 
2 
 
 
were also admitted without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on 
March 31, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his sixties. He was born in the United Kingdom (UK) and 
immigrated to the United States over 40 years ago. He has lived and worked in the 
United States ever since. He has owned a home and paid taxes in the United States for 
over 30 years. He will shortly be celebrating his 30th wedding anniversary to his wife, a 
U.S. citizen by birth. His son was born, raised, and lives in the United States. The vast 
majority of his assets, to include his substantial retirement accounts, are located in the 
United States. He was granted U.S. citizenship in the early 1990s. Applicant is 
published in peer-reviewed journals and highly regarded in his field. He has previously 
worked on projects benefiting the U.S. Government without issue. He submitted 
character references from friends and colleagues who attest to his reliability and 
trustworthiness. (Tr. at 22-29; Gx. 1 – 2; Ax. A – B, D, F – Q; Answer) 
 
 Applicant applied for and was granted a UK passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen. He used the UK passport only for personal convenience when traveling to the 
UK and other countries within the European Union. Applicant has not held a security 
clearance before and was unaware that possessing a foreign passport could make him 
ineligible for a security clearance until he received the SOR. He thereafter surrendered 
his UK passport to his facility security officer (FSO). The FSO states that Applicant’s 
employer will maintain the foreign passport until such time as Applicant no longer 
requires a clearance, terminates employment, or requests the return of the foreign 
passport. In the event that Applicant requests the return of his UK passport, the FSO 
will immediately report such to the Government. (Tr. at 20-22, 29-33; Gx. 1; Ax. C) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
 
3 
 
 
or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant also bears the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.1  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 Applicant’s acquisition and use of a UK passport raises this concern and also 
establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship,” to include “possession of a current foreign passport.” 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign preference concern. He surrendered the foreign 
passport to his FSO. Furthermore, the evidence firmly established that he does not 
have a preference for the UK or any foreign country over the United States. Specifically, 
Applicant established the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
                                                          
1 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).2 I hereby incorporate my above comments and highlight 
some additional whole-person factors. Applicant’s personal character and integrity, 
which are vital matters in assessing an individual’s suitability for a security clearance, 
are unassailable. He has been candid about his foreign passport and foreign 
connections from the start of his background investigation. Furthermore, I had an 
opportunity to observe his demeanor at hearing. I found him credible when he testified 
about his deep and longstanding loyalties and connections to the United States. I agree 
with his long-time friend, who provided a character reference and noted that Applicant 
considers the United States his “home.” (Ax. A) These favorable whole-person factors, 
in conjunction with the mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate the foreign 
preference concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
