1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
l )
)       ISCR Case No. 12-10504
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On November 27, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 21, 2014, and was
scheduled for March 21, 2014. However, the hearing was cancelled for that date and
rescheduled for April 11, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 21, 2014,
scheduling the hearing for April 11, 2014. Hearing EX I, Informational Letter and
Enclosure (DOD Directive 5220.6), was entered into the record. Government Exhibits
(GX) 1-10 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented
the testimony of four witnesses, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-G, which were
admitted into the record without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 17,
Applicant’s former employer is sponsoring him for the security clearance. Applicant worked for the      1
company until October 2013, but had to leave when the security issue arose. His former employer testified
that they stand ready to hire Applicant immediately.
2
2014. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted an indebtedness to the IRS, but
denied the factual allegations for past-due child support obligations, with explanation.  
Applicant is a 50-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor.  He1
graduated from high school in 1982 and has attended  college at night while working
during the day. He served on active duty in the United States Air Force from October
1982 until October 1992, receiving an honorable discharge. In 2001, Applicant married,
but since 2003, he has been divorced. He has two children. Applicant was with his
former employer since October 2011. (GX 1) He held a security clearance in the military
and while a contractor since 2006. 
The SOR alleges a indebtedness to the IRS for unpaid income taxes for the year
2011, in the amount of $24,444.00; a past-due child support obligation in the amount of
$3,176; and a past-due child support obligation in the amount of $7,772.00.
After Applicant left military service, he became a police officer. He worked full-
time as a county police officer from January 1995. He was injured in a police shooting
incident and was forced to retire early in November 2005. (AX F)  Due to the medical
disability, he did not work for approximately one year. (GX 10) He supported himself
with his retirement pay until 2006. He never sought unemployment wages. In 2006,
Applicant sought gainful employment but was not always successful. (GX 2) His
financial difficulties began as the result of his reduced income due to the early
retirement from the police. He did not have gainful employment for approximately one
year. He became delinquent on several accounts. He has since paid these non-SOR
debts. (GX 4)
Applicant began employment with a federal defense contractor in  early 2007. He
worked as a consultant on various contracts. When a contract would end, he would
usually find immediate employment. However, some contracts were for a few months or
paid a lesser salary.
In 2011, he began to encounter some financial difficulties due to illness of his
mother. (AX A) As the only son, he was responsible for her care. She was in a skilled
nursing center but when the Medicare funding ended, Applicant took her home with
him. He had to find a rehabilitation center for her. He paid for her care. The money that
Applicant had saved when he was working on contracts was exhausted due to her
health issues. Also, for the year 2011, Applicant was working as an independent
contractor and no taxes were withheld. Thus, the money that Applicant had for paying
3
federal tax were exhausted. Applicant never had any problems with his taxes before his
mother’s illness. His mother died in 2013. Applicant was responsible for her funeral
expenses. 
As a result, Applicant owed back taxes to the IRS. He contacted the IRS to
resolve the issue. (GX 3, 5) He was given a choice to make an offer in compromise or
a payment schedule. Applicant had recently lost the contract that he was working on
and did not have a sufficient amount to make an initial payment for a payment plan. He
completed a form in December 2013 to make an offer in compromise. Due to his
income level, he qualified for an amount of $7,545. He explained on the form that he
was not working and did not have sufficient funds to include the application fee. The
form was returned to Applicant. (AX B) He stands ready to resubmit the offer in
compromise or start a payment plan. Naturally, this depends on his full employment.
(Tr. 62) When Applicant contacted the IRS by phone, they informed him to immediately
contact them when he returns to work to restart the process.
Applicant disclosed on his 2012 security clearance application that he again
encountered some financial issues regarding a child custody case for his two children.
A child was born in 2003. In 2006, a court ordered child support in the monthly amount
of $1,082.  Applicant has consistently paid the amount. Another child was born in 2008.
Applicant’s child support obligation is $955. In 2013, as a result of Applicant’s decrease
in income, he motioned the court to modify. (AX C) The hearing is May 2014.
Applicant provided documentation from two different state child support agencies
that he has a payment history for his child support obligations. (AX D, E) He is current
with his accounts. He did not stop making his child support payments at any time. In
fact, the one account is automatically deducted from his medical disability pension. (Tr.
68) Applicant paid any arrears from 2007. The documentation shows that his last
payment was February 2014. 
Applicant’s last contract position paid an annual salary of $65,000. He receives
approximately $2,270 monthly from his medical disability pension. After expenses and
child support obligations, his net monthly remainder is about $565.  He is current on his
monthly expenses.  He has a retirement savings plan. He has no new debts. His early
credit reports reflect that he has accounts that are paid as agreed. (GX 9)
Applicant was candid and forthright. He testified that he has not ignored his
creditors. He modified his home mortgage to save money. He has had some financial
counseling through the modification program. He always saved money to use when a
contract ended. His mother’s illness and his medical disability were beyond his control.
He has always pursued employment. In fact, he has had scheduled interviews during
the security clearance process. (Tr. 78) He provided documentation that he may be
offered a position very shortly. (AX G) His former employer stands ready to employ him.
He was also candid that he has borrowed some money from family and friends until his
employment begins. (Tr. 93)  
4
Applicant’s colleague testified that Applicant is reliable and a team player.
Applicant is conscientious in his work and has shown he is a trustworthy,
knowledgeable individual in dealing with sensitive matters. (Tr. 27)
The CEO of a contracting company testified that he has known Applicant since
2009. He describes Applicant as an exceptional person who has been a top performer.
(Tr.32) Applicant is one of the leaders of a team of experts. The CEO acknowledged
that Applicant has never had any type of security issue. The CEO testified that in 2013
a contract came to an end and since then Applicant has been on hold. The clients are
eager for Applicant to work on their contracts. (Tr. 37)
Another colleague testified that she has known Applicant since 2009. She is
aware of the security concerns, but recommends Applicant for his security clearance.
Applicant is described as a dedicated worker. (Tr. 30)
Applicant’s manager testified that in his daily relationship with Applicant, he has
observed Applicant’s attitude and behavior under pressure. Applicant was the utmost
professional with a determined work ethic. He was trustworthy and diligent adhering to
all policy. (Tr. 44) 
. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
6
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant owes the IRS for unpaid taxes for the year 2011 and had past-due
child support obligations for his two children. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to
raise disqualifying conditions in ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
7
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
 
Applicant’s unemployment, underemployment, medical disability, and his
mother’s illness have conspired to cause financial difficulties over the years since 2006.
These were events beyond his control. His early retirement from the police and medical
situation also contributed to his financial problems. He saved his money and was not
extravagant. He has consistently paid his bills and obligations. He has made good-faith
efforts to repay overdue bills. He provided documentation to substantiate that the child
support payment plan is current. He received financial counseling as a result of the
home loan modification. Applicant stands ready with his original plan for an offer in
compromise with the IRS. The IRS told Applicant to contact them when he has
employment. His former employer stands ready with a contract. Applicant is in serious
job interviews and has a clear opportunity for another job. With steady employment,
Applicant has his financial issues under control. He has acted quite responsibly given
all the circumstances beyond his control. AG ¶¶ 20(b), (d) and (c)  apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
8
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 50 years old and has worked in the defense contracting field. He served in
the military and received an honorable discharge. Applicant worked as a police officer,
but had his career cut short due to a shooting incident. He was forced to retire on
disability. He went to school and trained in information technology. He has excellent
recommendations from his peers and employers. 
Applicant cared for his mother and despite his savings was unable to pay his
federal taxes for 2011. He contacted the IRS and stands ready to make his offer in
compromise. He is divorced. He has two children for whom he has provided child
support. Despite difficult times, he is current on his child support obligations.  I have no
doubts about his ability to satisfy his delinquent debts. Applicant submitted post-hearing
information concerning his job opportunity. That coupled with the fact that his former
employer stands ready to hire him provides him will provide with a steady income. He
has the resolve to remain steadfast. He has shown that in the past. I have considered
the information for mitigation purposes. Applicant has met his burden of proof to
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
