 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 13-01246 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 6, 2013. On 
December 16, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 6, 2014; answered it on January 14, 
2014; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on January 24, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on 
January 29, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on January 30, 2014, scheduling the hearing for February 21, 2014. I 
 
2 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted 
in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) 
A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 4, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. For the reasons 
set out below, I am not confident that his admissions of SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.e were provident. 
His admissions of SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, and 1.g are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old nuclear ship refueler employed by a defense 
contractor. (Tr. 31.) He has worked for his current employer since July 2013. He 
graduated from high school in June 2004. He was unemployed until October 2004. He 
attended college from January 2005 to January 2006 and from January to May 2009, 
but he did not obtain a degree. He worked in the food service industry from May to 
September 2008, when he quit his job because his supervisor told him he would be fired 
if he took a day off on his birthday. He was unemployed from September 2008 to March 
2009. He worked at various seasonal and intermittent jobs until he began his current 
job. He has never married and has no children. He has never held a security clearance.  
 
 Since Applicant was 19 years old, he has pursued his dream of working as a 
freelance production assistant for a travel and game show. He testified that the pay was 
good when he was working, but it only lasted three to six months of the year. In 
between, he worked various intermittent jobs. He attributed his financial problems to the 
lack of consistent, steady employment. (Tr. 23-24.) 
 
 Applicant now makes from $16.85 to $17.30 per hour, depending on which shift 
he works. He estimates that his gross annual pay is around $35,000 per year. (Tr. 34.) 
He is sharing an apartment with a friend and lives frugally. He estimates that he has a 
net monthly remainder of about $433 after paying all his living expenses. (Tr. 40.) He 
has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 41.) 
 
 Except for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, all the debts alleged in the SOR are 
reflected on his credit report. (GX 2.) The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the 
SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a (delinquent student loan, $5,945). When Applicant submitted his 
security clearance application, he disclosed a delinquent student loan of about $8,763 
that was referred for collection in December 2012. The delinquent student loan was 
incurred in 2006 or 2007, when Applicant was in college. (Tr. 25-26.) His federal tax 
refund of $1,308 was intercepted to partially pay this debt, and he is making payments 
by payroll deduction. (GX 1 at 41-42.) His pay vouchers reflect that $86.77 was 
deducted from his pay for the pay period ending on January 19, 2014; $66.65 was 
deducted for the pay period ending on January 26, 2014; $83.80 was deducted for the 
pay period ending on February 9, 2014; and $107.78 was deducted for the pay period 
 
3 
 
ending on February 15, 2014. (AX A.) He testified that he initiated the payroll deductions 
after he was notified that his wages would be garnished if he did not take action to 
repay the debt. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b (collection account for $471). This account was opened in July 
2011 and referred for collection in August 2013. (GX 2 at 4.) Applicant testified that he 
did not recognize this account and has not tried to contact the collection agency. (Tr. 
42-43.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c (collection account for $339). This account was referred for 
collection in March 2007. (GX 2 at 4.) Applicant testified that he did not recognize this 
account and has not attempted to contact the collection agency. (Tr. 43.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d (past-due account for $2,237). This debt is not reflected on 
Applicant’s credit report (GX 2), and there is no other evidence in the record 
establishing it. Applicant testified that he did not recognize this debt, and he speculated 
that it might be related to the voluntary vehicle repossession that he disclosed on his 
security clearance application. He believed that his financial obligation was satisfied 
when he voluntarily surrendered the vehicle. His credit report reflects an automobile 
account with the same creditor that was closed with a zero balance, which is consistent 
with his testimony. (GX 2 at 5; Tr. 43-44.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e (collection account for $1,164). This account was referred for 
collection in September 2008. (GX 2 at 6.) Applicant did not recognize this account and 
has not attempted to contact the collection agency. (Tr. 44.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f (collection account for $571). This account was referred for 
collection in March 2009. (GX 2 at 6.) Applicant admitted having an account with the 
original creditor, but he has not taken any action to resolve it. (Tr. 44.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g (collection account for $442). This account was referred for 
collection in November 2012. Applicant attended the community college, the original 
creditor for this debt, but he testified that he did not know he had a remaining balance 
on his account. (Tr. 45.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he does not know how much he has in his bank account, 
even though he has a net remainder of more than $400 each month and has been 
employed full time since July 2013. He could not explain how he spent the net 
remainder, other than on “everyday life things that come up.” (Tr. 53-54.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
4 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts. The concern under this guideline is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is not established by the evidence. 
However, Applicant’s credit report and his admissions at the hearing establish the 
remaining debts and two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). 
 
 Security concerns based on financial considerations may be mitigated by any of 
the following conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
 
AG ¶ 20(f): the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are numerous, recent, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. They are not the result of circumstances beyond his control. He has not sought or 
obtained counseling, He has not disputed any of the debts. Except for the student loan 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, he has not initiated any action to resolve the debts. His payroll 
deductions for SOR ¶ 1.a were not a “good-faith” effort to repay the debt, because they 
were not initiated until he was threatened with garnishment. See ISCR Case No. 09-
5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011). Affluence is not at issue in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant was sincere and candid at the hearing. He has been drifting since age 
19, pursuing a dream of being an entertainment producer. He has paid little attention to 
his income or his expenses. He has little understanding of his current financial situation. 
Even though he has been generating a net remainder of more than $400 per month for 
six months, he does now know how much money he has or where his discretionary 
funds were spent. He has good intentions but no plan for resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b-1.g. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
