 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00978 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence; 
and Guideline C, foreign preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence; and Guideline C, foreign preference. DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2013, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on December 27, 2013.1 The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
and he received it on February 3, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
submitted several documents, which I marked as Items 11-14 and included in the 
record. The case was assigned to me on March 13, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts 
concerning the country of Afghanistan.2 Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the facts in the Administrative 
Notice request. See the Afghanistan section of the Findings of Fact, infra, for the 
material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on this country.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. I granted 
Department Counsel’s request to take administrative notice.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations stated in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.g, but denied the allegation stated in ¶ 2.a. Those admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He was born in Afghanistan in 1984. He was married in 
2004. From 2004 to 2008, he served as an in-country translator to U.S. forces in 
Afghanistan. He came to the United States in February 2008 with his wife and two 
daughters. In 2008, he chose to immigrate to the United States because of the 
opportunities, freedom, and education that it offered. Since moving to the United States, 
he has had two sons, born as U.S. citizens. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
                                                          
1 The FORM included as evidence Items 1-10. 
 
2 FORM at 3-6. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
 
3 
 
 
in March 2013. Between 2008 and 2012, he has returned to Afghanistan on several 
occasions as a deployed translator/cultural specialist working for government 
contractors in support of U.S. forces there. In April 2013, he formally renounced his 
Afghanistan citizenship. Later, in November 2013, he voluntarily surrendered his 
Afghanistan passport to his security officer, who oversaw its destruction. His wife and 
two daughters reside with him in the United States and are currently permanent resident 
aliens (his wife has applied for citizenship). He recently purchased a home in the United 
States valued at over $400,000.5   
  
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and/or citizens of 
Afghanistan:  
 
 1. His wife and two daughters (ages nine and six), as stated above, are citizens 
of Afghanistan, but permanent residents in the United States. Applicant intends to apply 
for citizenship for his daughters now that he is back in this country from his 
deployments. His wife and family have no intention of returning to Afghanistan.6  
 
 2. His mother, brother, and sister. His mother has no affiliation with the 
Afghanistan government. His brother has no affiliation with the Afghanistan government. 
His sister is a high school student and has no affiliation with the government. He has 
telephone contact with all these relatives once every five or six months.7 
 
 3. His father-in-law and mother-in-law. His father-in-law works with the 
Afghanistan Ministry of Justice. His mother-in-law is a housewife. Both want to 
immigrate to the United States and are waiting for their daughter to obtain U.S. 
citizenship so she can sponsor them. He has weekly contact with his father-in-law and 
his mother-in-law.8    
 
 4. His three step-brothers and three step-sisters (also described by him in the 
documents as half brothers and sisters). In his FORM response (Item 11), he stated that 
he only met them once at his father’s funeral in 1997. He has not been in contact with 
them since then and does not know where they reside. He indicated in a linguist 
screening document that his last contact with any of them was in 2000 (Item 6).9  
 
 5. His step-mother. He has never met her and does not know what her 
circumstances are at the present time.10 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 4, 5, 11, 13. 
 
6 Items 3, 4, 11. 
 
7 Items 3, 6, 11. 
 
8 Items 3, 6, 7, 11. 
 
9 Items 6, 9. 
 
10 Items 3, 6, 11. 
 
4 
 
 
 6. His three brothers-in-law and two sisters-in-law. Two of his brothers-in-law 
have been employed by U.S. forces as linguists and both are currently seeking visas to 
enter the United States. The other brother-in-law is a student. One sister-in-law is a 
student and the other is a housewife. He has weekly contact with all except one sister-
in-law with whom he has contact once a year.11 
 
 Applicant owns an apartment in Kabul, Afghanistan. There is a discrepancy in the 
evidence concerning the value of the apartment. He stated in a screening questionnaire 
that the value was about $40,000 (Item 5). In his SOR answer (Item 3), he stated the 
apartment was valued at $110,000. He stated in his FORM response that this property 
is under a sales contract and pending a final sale.12 
 
 Applicant is supported in his effort to gain a security clearance by the command 
he supported as a linguist. He was personally sought out by the commanding general 
(CG) of the command to work as a linguist, based upon the CG’s previous personal 
experience with Applicant.13 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 Formerly under the control of the United Kingdom, Afghanistan received 
independence in August 1919. It is a rugged and mountainous country in Southwestern 
Asia, approximately the size of Texas, and has common borders with Pakistan on the 
east and the south, Iran on the west, and Russia on the north. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including 
an invasion by the Soviet Union in 1979, occupation by the Soviet Union until 1989, and 
civil war between the occupiers and home-grown freedom fighters, known as Mujahidin. 
Anarchy ensued, and fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and religious 
warlords and their respective militias even after the Soviet Union withdrew from the 
country. By the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power and controlled significant portions 
of the country, imposing repressive policies and sharia law, guiding all aspects of 
Muslim life. Afghanistan became a sanctuary for terrorist groups. 
 
 After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, U.S. 
demands that Afghanistan expel Osama Bin-Laden and his followers were rejected by 
the Taliban. In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations 
in the country, forcing the Taliban out of power. Following a few years of governance by 
an interim government, a democratic presidential election took place in October 2004, 
and a new democratic government took power. Despite the election, many daunting 
challenges remained, largely because terrorists, including al-Qa’ida and the Taliban, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
11 Items 3, 6, 11. 
 
12 Items 3, 5, 11. 
 
13 Items 11-12. 
 
 
5 
 
 
continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. Terrorists continue to 
target United States and Afghan interests through suicide bombings, assassinations, 
and hostage taking. 
 
 Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor, for there are continuing 
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; widespread official corruption with 
impunity; ineffective government investigations of abuses by local security forces; 
arbitrary arrest and detention; judicial corruption; violations of privacy rights; violence 
and societal discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; trafficking in 
persons; and restrictions on freedoms of religion, the press, assembly, and movement. 
 
 The Taliban-led insurgency in Afghanistan has diminished in some areas, but 
remains resilient and capable of challenging U.S. and international goals. Security gains 
are especially fragile in areas where International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) 
have been concentrated since 2010 and are now transitioning the security lead to 
Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF). The ANSF will require international assistance 
through 2014 and beyond.  
 
 In May 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring Strategic 
Partnership Agreement (SPA). This ten-year agreement demonstrates the United 
States’ commitment to strengthen Afghanistan’s sovereignty, stability, and prosperity 
and continued cooperation to defeat al-Qa’ida and its affiliates.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
14 See FORM, p. 6 (references I-VI). 
 
 
6 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
7 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship of 
Afghanistan with the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden 
of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his relatives living 
in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist his relatives living in Afghanistan who might be coerced by terrorists or other 
governmental entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”15 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, or his relatives living in Afghanistan, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. As demonstrated by his regular contacts with his family, he 
continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for them. Applicant’s concern for 
his relatives is a positive character trait that increases his trustworthiness; however, it 
also increases the concern about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel 
produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
who are living in Afghanistan. Applicant communicates with these relatives on a regular 
basis. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this 
presumption. Given Afghanistan’s fragile security situation, Applicant’s relationships 
with his relatives living in that country are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶¶ 7(c) and 
7(d) apply because Applicant resides with his wife and daughters and because he owns 
a property interest in Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s current linguistics position could cause 
him to be placed in a position to choose between the interests of his relatives and those 
of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(c) has limited applicability concerning his step-mother and 
step-siblings because of the limited contact he had with them. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He moved his family to the United States where 
his two sons were born, and his wife and children are seeking U.S. citizenship. 
Additionally, he volunteered to go into harm’s way to serve as a linguist for U.S. forces 
in Afghanistan on multiple occasions since 2004. In performing his linguist duties, he 
earned the admiration and respect of the CG with whom he served, to the extent that he 
was personally requested by the CG to serve on his staff. The evidence supports that 
Applicant has longstanding loyalties toward the United States and would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
The value of Applicant’s property in Afghanistan does not rise to the level of 
creating a conflict when compared to the assets and life that he has established in the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the foreign preference security concern: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; . . . (7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
Applicant was a citizen of Afghanistan who possessed a passport from that 
country. In April 2013, he formally renounced his Afghanistan citizenship by sending a 
letter to the embassy. He also surrendered his Afghanistan passport to his security 
officer in April 2013. The passport was destroyed in September 2013. Based upon 
these actions, I find the above disqualifying condition does not apply.  
 
However, if The DOHA Appeal Board determines that a disqualifying condition 
applies, I also considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and determined 
the following are potentially applicable under this guideline:  
 
10 
 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
As discussed above, Applicant formally renounced his citizenship and his foreign 
passport was destroyed. I find mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance at this time. I considered the ties he established in this 
country and his service as a linguist in a hostile environment, thereby demonstrating his 
longstanding loyalty to this country. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
