 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX )  ADP Case No. 13-01023 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Questionnaires for Public Trust Position (e-
QIP), on May 1, 2013. On October 16, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 30, 2013 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on January 17, 2014, and I received the case assignment on 
January 18, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 20, 2014, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on March 19, 2014. The government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified 
and submitted Exhibits A through F, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
 
 
2 
 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 26, 2014. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer Applicant admitted the factual allegations in && 1.a to 1.e, 1.g, and 
1.h  of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in && 1.f. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a public trust 
position.   
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He is married and does not have any children. He 
works for a defense contractor. Applicant is a college graduate. (Tr. 13-17; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant claims his delinquent debt dates from the early 2000s when he was a 
college student. He incurred these debts and could not repay them. They total $10,325. 
Now the $4,000 net monthly income he and his wife earn from their jobs allows him to 
settle some debts and arrange a debt repayment plan for the remaining debts. He did 
dispute two debts and they are not on his current credit report. He and his wife do not 
have any credit cards. They own one car. (Tr. 19-34, 37; Exhibits 2, 3, 5, B-F) 
 
Applicant placed three debts in a debt repayment plan operated by a debt 
manager. Those debts are the ones in Subparagraph 1.a ($3,198 to a bank that has a 
lien since 2002), Subparagraph 1.d ($922 owed to a credit card company), and 
Subparagraph 1.e ($1,201 owed to a bank).  Applicant admits these debts. He pays 
$540 into the plan each month by automatic deduction. He started these payments in 
January 2014. Applicant expects these debts to be paid by May 2016. These debts are 
being resolved. (Tr. 23-25, 28, 29, 40; Exhibits 2, 3, 5, B-F) 
 
Applicant paid three debts by settling them. The first debt addressed is that of 
Subparagraph 1.b, being a debt for $1,527 that he paid. The debt was settled for $600 
with two payments of $300 each being made in November and December 2013. The 
credit report of March 16, 2014 (Exhibit 5), shows the debt was paid for less than the full 
amount. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 24-27; Exhibits 2, 3, 5, B-F) 
 
Applicant paid the second debt found in Subparagraph 1.c for $2,161 owed on a 
credit card. This debt was settled for $831.66. Applicant was required to make two 
payments of $600 in February 2014 and then $231.66 in March 2014. His bank 
statement shows the payments were made. The March 16, 2014 credit report shows the 
debt being paid at that time under a partial payment agreement. This debt is resolved. 
(Tr. 27, 28; Exhibits 2, 3, 5, D) 
 
Applicant paid the delinquent debt in Subparagraph 1.g for $385 owed to a 
department store. He settled it for $185.54, making several payments. The final 
payment was for $45. That payment is shown on the collector’s payment screen printed 
from its website. The balance owed is zero dollars. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 29, 30, 41; 
Exhibits 2, 3, 5, C) 
 
3 
 
 
The next debt listed in the SOR was for $710 in Subparagraph 1.f. This debt is 
owed to a cellular telephone company. Applicant disputed the debt with the credit 
reporting agencies on their website and had it removed from his credit reports. He does 
not have a written copy of his dispute document. (Tr. 29, 41; Exhibits 2, 3, 5, E) 
 
Applicant was not able to repay the debt listed in Subparagraph 1.h for $221 
owed to a cable television provider. Applicant contends he called the company but was 
told they did not have a record of any debt owed to them. He does not find that debt on 
his current credit report. He disputed this debt. (Tr. 30, 31, 41; Exhibit 2, 3, 5, E) 
 
Applicant’s student loans are not delinquent. They are consolidated and he pays 
$225 monthly on that account. (Tr. 32; Exhibit A) 
 
Applicant received credit counseling and financial information from his debt 
repayment plan representative. Nothing he received was a formal credit counseling 
course, but he did prepare a budget he tries to follow as a result of the information. He 
did not receive a certificate of completion of any formal credit course. (Tr. 34, 43, 44) 
 
Applicant testified in a forthright manner. He was credible and frank in his 
explanation of his debts and the actions he had taken to resolve them.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as Asensitive positions.@  (See 
Regulation && C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  AThe standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person=s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.@ (See 
Regulation & C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation & C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge=s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG & 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the Awhole-person concept.@ The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  
AG ¶ 19 (b), “indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the  
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic 
plan to repay the debt” applies. Applicant incurred the debt while in college and did not 
repay it for ten years.  
 
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may 
raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt while in college 
and in his younger years. He was unable to pay some obligations for about ten years. 
 
AG ¶ 19 (e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated 
by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, 
and/or other financial analysis” applies. While in college and after graduation Applicant 
spent more money than he was able to repay within a reasonable period of time.   
 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, 
requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG & 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose between about 2000 and 2001. He 
accumulated some delinquent debt due to his inattention to his spending habits in 
relationship to his income.  These circumstances are no longer extant.  I find the 
behavior occurred under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it 
does not raise concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
The evidence raises this potentially mitigating condition.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c).  
 
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant 
received some type of financial counseling and resolved six of the delinquent debts, 
either by payment or settlement. Two debts he disputed and they were removed from 
his credit record.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
 
6 
 
issue” applies. Applicant disputed two debts because he honestly believed he did not 
owe them. The credit reporting agencies removed them from his credit record. 
 
I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant=s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant=s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): A(1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.@  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  When these problems first began, 
Applicant was a young man, still in college. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) He accumulated debt 
due to circumstances largely beyond his control, mainly due to  his jobs after college 
that did not pay him sufficiently to resolve delinquent debts he accumulated during 
college. (See AG & 2(a)(2).)  
 
Most significantly, he has taken affirmative action to pay or resolve most of the 
delinquent debts raising security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) Of course, the issue is 
not simply whether all his debts are paid. It is whether his financial circumstances raise 
concerns about his fitness to hold a position of public trust.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
7 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
