 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01013 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 4) On October 22, 2013, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within DOD for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On November 18, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived 
his right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated January 21, 2014, was provided to him on January 23, 2014.1 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 9, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations relating to 
the six debts alleged under financial considerations. (Item 3) He also provided some 
mitigating information. (Item 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 44 years old, and he has worked as a real property analyst for a 
defense contractor since April 2013.3 He is a first-time applicant for a security clearance.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1988. He was awarded a bachelor’s 
degree in 1995. He has no military history or police record. Applicant has been married 
twice – from 1998 to 2000 and from 2004 to 2013. Both marriages ended by divorce. He 
has two children born during his second marriage – a ten-year-old daughter and a five-
year-old son. Applicant was awarded custody of his two children.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges six separate debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f) – (1.a) a 
collection account for $4,441, (1.b) a collection account for $1,049, (1.c) a collection 
account for $3,041, (1.d) a past-due amount of $6,000 on a $222,000 mortgage, (1.e) a 
collection account for $5,840, and (1.f) a collection account for $14,895. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that he entered into re-payment plans with 
three of his creditors for debts (1.a), (1.b), and (1.f), and that he has paid off debt (1.b). 
Applicant claimed that he entered into a trial period to have his mortgage modified (debt 
(1.d)) and that as of December 2013, this account was no longer delinquent. The FORM 
does not contain documentation to support Appellant’s claim that he is making 
payments on debts (1.a), (1.d), and (1.f). The FORM does not contain any 
documentation regarding debts (1.c) and (1.e). 
 
                                            
1
The DOHA transmittal letter is dated January 23, 2014, and Applicant’s receipt is dated February 
4, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2
Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s October 1, 2012 e-QIP 
and SOR response are the primary sources for the facts in the Statement of Facts. (Items 3 and 4) 
 
3
The facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s April 25, 2013 e-QIP. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  
Applicant experienced five lay-offs from contractor jobs he held since 2008, the 
most recent being in March 2013. Additionally, Applicant’s wife in anticipation of their 
divorce stopped paying accounts held in Applicant’s name. She also started accruing 
balances on dormant credit cards in Applicant’s name. He only became aware of his 
estranged wife’s actions during their divorce proceedings.  
 
Applicant provided documentation that he retained the services of a consumer 
credit counseling service by letter dated November 8, 2013. The credit counseling 
service developed a comprehensive budget for Applicant. He did not provide 
documentation showing that he was making payments in accordance with the budget. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, e-QIP, and SOR response.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are numerous, recent, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. His marital breakup, periods of unemployment, and his ex-wife’s apparent failure 
to responsibly manage the household finances were circumstances beyond his control, 
but there is insufficient evidence that he has acted reasonably. As noted above, he 
indicated that he was paying off two debts and that his mortgage was current. However, 
Applicant did not provide documentation of same nor did he provide documentation of 
the status of the two debts. He did provide documentation that one debt was paid. 
 
Despite having been put on notice of the Government’s concerns by the October 
2013 SOR and also when he was provided with a copy of Department Counsel’s 
FORM, he failed to provide evidence to address these concerns. Accordingly, I am 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
limited to the evidence contained in the FORM and cannot speculate on what Applicant 
has or has not done.4 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a mature, intelligent, educated, and law-abiding adult. He is talented 
and dedicated to serving the DOD as a contractor. He has faced significant life 
challenges after experiencing five lay-offs and two divorces. He is devoted to his 
children as a single father. 
 
A security clearance is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is 
no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has good 
intentions and appears to be on the right track. He fell short on documenting his efforts 
                                            
4
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and addressing the Government’s concerns as outlined in Department Counsel’s 
FORM. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:     
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
