 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01187 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has two 
charged-off student loans totaling more than $22,000. She is almost $4,000 past due on 
other student loans totaling approximately $71,000 and owes more than $4,000 on 
seven collection accounts, all alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). None of the 
delinquent obligations have been paid. The financial considerations security concerns 
remain. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 9, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing financial considerations security concerns. DoD 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
due to financial considerations. On December 26, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR 
and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), dated January 31, 2014. The FORM contained eight 
attachments. On February 19, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on March 21, 2014. As of April 7, 2014, no response had been 
received. On April 9, 2014, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted all of the debts listed in the SOR, 
and her admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old logistics management analysis supervisor who has 
worked for a defense contractor since February 2010, and seeks to maintain a secret 
security clearance. No information as to her duty performance was submitted. She is 
married and has two children ages 26 and 33. There is no information as to her 
husband’s occupation. The record does not show her or her husband’s annual income 
nor does it contain any information as to monthly expenses.  
 
 Applicant co-signed on student loans for her daughter. In her August 2013 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI), she indicated the student loans totaled approximately 
$89,000. Two student loans (SOR 1.a and 1.b) totaling approximately $22,000 were 
charged off. The last actions taken on these accounts were in July 2009 and November 
2010. (Item 7) 
 
 The student loans were obtained for Applicant’s daughter to attend a university. 
(Item 8) In 2011, her daughter divorced, left the university, and moved in with Applicant. 
Her daughter’s child also moved in with Applicant. (Item 8) Additional student loans 
became due in January 2012, six months after her daughter left school. Approximately 
$4,000 is more than 150 days past due on two additional student loans (SOR 1.c and 
1.d) that total approximately $71,000. Applicant hopes her daughter will be able to start 
repaying the student loans once she obtains full-time employment. (Item 8)  
 
 Applicant has a $3,048 credit card collection account (SOR 1.e). In 2011, when 
her daughter and grandchild moved into her home, Applicant was unable to pay her 
mortgage, utilities, car payment, and food expenses while making payments on her 
various other accounts. She stopped paying the other accounts. (Item 8) She owes 
$649 on a telephone company collection account (SOR 1.f).  
 
3 
 
 
 In 2012, Applicant received medical treatment which was paid in part by her 
health insurance. She had five medical accounts (SOR 1.g through 1.k) totaling 
approximately $700 placed for collection. In May 2013, she was able to settle a number 
of credit card accounts not listed in the SOR. There is no evidence she has received 
financial counseling or has had recent contact with her creditors on her collection 
accounts or the past-due student loans.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her 
PSI, and her SOR response. Applicant co-signed on two student loans that were 
charged off in 2009 and 2010. She is more than 150 days past due on two additional 
student loans that total in excess of $70,000. She has seven additional collection 
accounts, three which have balances of $100 or less. The evidence supports application 
of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 
AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
   
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Because Applicant has multiple delinquent debts and her financial problems are 
continuing in nature, she receives minimal application of the mitigating condition listed in 
AG ¶ 20(a). Even the three small collection accounts of less than $100 each have yet to 
be paid. Additionally, there is no evidence Applicant has had recent communications 
with the creditors of her delinquent accounts. Applicant’s handling of her finances, under 
the circumstances, casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Likewise, Applicant receives only limited application of the mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(b). Her daughter and grandchild moved in with her in 2011, which 
increased her daily living expenses. There is little documentary evidence establishing 
Applicant was substantially affected by these circumstances other than her statement 
that she was unable to pay her other accounts after she paid her mortgage, car 
payment, utilities, and food expenses. It is noted the two charged-off student loans were 
charged off one or two years before her daughter and grandchild moved in with her. 
There is no evidence Applicant has been recently unemployed. She has made no 
payments on her delinquent obligations. She failed to resolve her debts and failed to 
reduce her delinquencies.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no 
evidence of financial counseling, nor is there any indication that the delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR are being addressed.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because, to date, 
Applicant has made no effort to address the delinquent SOR accounts. There is no 
documentary evidence that she contacted any of her creditors and tried to arrange 
 
6 
 
repayment plans. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because 
Applicant has admitted the debts. She disputes the telephone collection account (SOR 
1.f, $649), but has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to evaluate her demeanor, appearance, or credibility. From the record, I am 
unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. Even if I found for her in these 
matters, there is no evidence of payment on her delinquent debts. Her failure to repay 
her creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects 
traits which raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her 
circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her 
past efforts to address her delinquent debts. By failing to provide such information, and 
in relying on only a scant paragraph of explanation, financial considerations security 
concerns remain.  
 
I must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and her 
actions. She is not required to make payment on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. 
Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. In 2013, she was able to settle 
 
7 
 
other credit card accounts not listed in the SOR. The issue is not simply whether all 
Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have not – it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but it is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid her delinquent obligations, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed her 
past-due obligations, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E 3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Cnsiderations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
