 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00719 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant committed about 20 mostly traffic-related offenses from 1998 to 2011, 
and he was fined about $3,868. He intentionally omitted derogatory information from his 
October 1, 2012 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version 
of a security clearance application (SF 86). Personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2012, Applicant submitted an SF 86. (Item 4) On July 31, 2013, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). (Item 
1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On August 21, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated November 1, 2013, was provided to him on November 8, 2013.1 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations relating to 
his history of arrests and fines, and he admitted that he failed to provide some 
derogatory information on his October 1, 2012 SF 86. (Item 3) He also provided some 
mitigating information. (Item 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old, and he has worked as an engineering technician for a 
defense contractor since April 2012.3 He also worked from October 2008 to January 
2010 as a senior engineering technician. He was employee of the month for May 2013.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2001. He attended a community college 
from August 2003 to May 2004. He received a certificate of completion for Machine 
Shop Technician in 2004, and he returned to college in 2010. He does not have a 
college degree. He has never served in the military. He has never married, and he does 
not have any children.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In 1998, Applicant was fined $75 for running a stop sign. In 1999, he was fined 
$80 for speeding. In 2000, he was fined $540 for shoplifting and failing to wear his 
seatbelt. In 2001, he was fined $85 for speeding. 
  
In 2002, Applicant was fined $110 for speeding and failing to wear his seat belt; 
he was fined $172 for disorderly conduct; and he was fined for careless driving. In 2002, 
he was fined $310 for driving with improper equipment and expired tags. In 2002, he 
was charged with operating a vehicle while intoxicated (OWI) and speeding. The OWI 
charge was dismissed. (December 5, 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
personal subject interview (PSI), Item 5 at 6) 
                                            
1
The DOHA transmittal letter is dated November 4, 2013, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
November 8, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2
Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s October 1, 2012 SF 86 
and/or his December 5, 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI) 
and SOR response are the primary sources for the facts in the Statement of Facts. (Items 3-5) 
 
3
The facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s October 1, 2012 SF 86. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In 2003, Applicant was fined $102 for contempt of court; he was fined $421 for 
assault/battery; and he was fined $216 for not having liability insurance. In 2003, 
Applicant was working at a car wash. (December 5, 2012 OPM PSI, Item 5 at 4) More 
than $1,000 in valuables were stolen from a vehicle. (Item 5 at 4) Applicant and four 
other workers were arrested and charged with grand larceny, a felony, and contempt of 
court. (Item 5 at 4) After the victim’s property was returned, the charges were 
dismissed, and Applicant was advised that his charge of grand larceny was expunged 
from his record. (Item 3, Item 5 at 5)  
 
In 2004, Applicant was fined $350 for driving while license suspended; and he 
was fined $123 for contempt of court. In 2004, he was arrested and charged with 
possession of marijuana. Applicant was a passenger in a vehicle where the police found 
marijuana. (Item 3) The driver pleaded guilty to possession of marijuana, and the 
charge against Applicant was dismissed. (Item 3)  
 
In 2006, Applicant was fined $145 for improper equipment; he was fined $185 for 
speeding and driving while license suspended; he was fined $315 for driving without 
liability insurance; and he was fined $175 for driving without a license tag.  
 
In 2007, Applicant was fined $127 for careless driving. In 2010, Applicant was 
fined $240 for speeding. In 2011, Applicant was fined $97 for driving with an expired 
license. 
 
Accuracy of SF 86 
 
Section 22 Police Record of Applicant’s October 1, 2012 SF 86 asked, “Other 
than those offenses already listed by you, have you EVER had the following happen to 
you? . . . Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense? . . . Have you EVER 
been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered, “Yes” 
and disclosed in that in March 2003 he was “[c]harged with Grand Larceny along with 4 
others. While in custody property reappeared all charges drop[p]ed and expunged from 
record.” However, he failed to disclose that he was charged with OWI in 2002, and he 
was charged with possession of marijuana in 2004. 
 
Applicant said the 2002 arrest and charge of OWI “slipped his mind.” (Item 3) He 
said he did not disclose the 2004 arrest and charge of possession of marijuana 
“because I was found not guilty of the charges and I did not think that it counted. I 
misunderstood the question since I was not guilty of the charge I did not think I had to 
list it.” (Item 3)  
 
Applicant answered, “No” to Section 13C “Employment Record” of his October 
1, 2012 SF 86, which asked: 
 
Have any of the following happened to you in the last seven (7) years at 
employment activities that you have not previously listed? Fired from a 
job? Quit a job after being told you would be fired? Have you left a job by 
mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct? Left a 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance? 
(Item 4) 
 
Applicant indicated on his SF 86 that his reason for leaving employment in 2003 
was “school.” (Item 4) He acknowledged that he was told initially by his employer that 
he “was fired for my arrest” for grand larceny.  (Item 3) Applicant explained he did not 
disclose his firing because his employer offered to rehire Applicant; however, Applicant 
did not accept the position because he wanted to return to college. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant indicated on his SF 86 that his reason for leaving employment in 
January 2004 was “laid off.” (Item 4) He explained during his December 5, 2012 OPM 
PSI that “he was called in by his supervisor [name omitted] and was told that he was not 
performing up to what was expected and he was fired.” (Item 5) However, in response 
to the SOR, he said, “To the best of my knowledge I was ‘laid off’.  Upon coming to work 
for my scheduled shift on 01/2004, I was instructed to pack my tools and that I no longer 
had a job. No reason was given at that time.” (Item 3)     
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Three personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those three disqualifying conditions provide:   
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,   
. . . [to] determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness;4 
                                            
4
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶ 16(a) is established. Applicant’s SOR alleges that he failed to disclose on his 
October 1, 2012 SF 86 an arrest for possession of marijuana, an arrest for OWI, and 
termination of employment on two occasions under adverse circumstances. He read the 
questions and provided non-derogatory explanations for resolution of his larceny charge 
and his employment history. He has sufficient education to understand the plain meaning 
of the questions. His failure to disclose derogatory information was a deliberate decision 
made with intent to conceal adverse information about his worthiness to receive access to 
classified information.  
 
AG ¶ 16(d) applies. Applicant’s approximately 20 mostly traffic-related offenses 
committed from 1998 to 2011, resulting in about $3,868 in fines raise security concerns 
about his pattern of rule violations.  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies. There is substantial evidence that Applicant engaged in 
conduct that adversely affects his personal, professional, and community standing. 
Further analysis concerning applicability of mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) mitigates the security concern raised under AG ¶ 16(e). I do not 
believe Applicant could be coerced or pressured into release of classified information by 
threats of public disclosure of his history of mostly traffic-related offenses. Those 
offenses are matters of public record and are documented in his security file.   
 
Applicant’s 2002 OWI, 2003 grand larceny, and 2004 possession of marijuana 
charges were all dismissed. He denied culpability for these three criminal offenses. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.d are found for Applicant. Even though these charges were dismissed, 
they must still be disclosed upon request on his SF 86.  
 
None of the other mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant has not had 
any traffic violations since 2011, his 20 mostly traffic-related offenses cannot be 
considered in isolation. His false statements on his October 1, 2012 SF 86 are recent 
and serious. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant is 31 years old, and since April 2012, he has worked as an engineering 
technician for a defense contractor. He was employee of the month for May 2013. He 
graduated from high school and attended a community college from August 2003 to 
May 2004. He received a certificate of completion for Machine Shop Technician in 2004, 
and he returned to college in 2010. He received about 20 tickets or charges for mostly 
driving-related offenses from 1998 to 2011, and he was fined about $3,868. For the last 
six years, he has only been charged with speeding and driving with an expired license. 
For more than two years he had not received any tickets. He is credited with driving 
more responsibly and showing greater maturity and judgment in his driving practices 
over the last several years.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant made false statements on October 1, 2012, on his SF 86, about 
ending his employment under adverse circumstances, his arrest for marijuana 
possession and an OWI arrest. Security clearance holders are relied upon to provide 
accurate information especially in a security context. Accurate information is crucial to 
safeguarding national security. His false statements show lack of judgment and raise 
unresolved questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:     
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g.   Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
