KEYWORD: Guideline j; Guideline D; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had assaulted his daughter. 
Applicant’s plea of guilty and the testimony of the detective are sufficient evidence to support
the challenged finding.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 13-00785.a1
DATE: 04/11/2014
DATE: April 11, 2014
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-00785
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
23, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline D (Sexual
Behavior), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel  requested a hearing.  On December
16, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  Department Counsel cross-appealed pursuant to Directive ¶
E3.1.28.  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in finding that he
had assaulted his daughter and whether the Judge erred in his application of the Guideline F
mitigating conditions.  Department Counsel raised the following issues on cross-appeal: whether the
Judge erred by refusing the Government’s pre-hearing amendment to the SOR and whether the
Judge erred by denying a Government motion to keep the record open for the submission of rebuttal
evidence.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
 Applicant served in the U.S. military for ten years.  He was charged with sexual harassment
by two female subordinates, although he testified that these charge were dropped.  He was court-
martialed for unauthorized absence, to which he pled guilty.  He was sentenced to confinement and
to demotion to E-4.
Applicant and his wife were married for nearly 20 years, though they are now separated.  He
blames his financial problems and his criminal conviction on his wife and their “rocky relationship.”
Decision at 3.
He stated that his financial difficulties began in 1994, the year he and his wife married.  The
couple lived beyond their means and, when they would separate, he would stop paying on his debts.
Applicant was discharged in bankruptcy, but, in 2003, he became unemployed for a year.  He
became fully employed in 2004 but, in 2008, he bought a house for which he was unable to meet the
monthly payments.  The house is in foreclosure.  He stated that he is not able to resolve this debt
because his wife is not cooperative.  Applicant’s SOR lists 14 debts.  He claims to have taken steps
to resolve two of them, but the remaining ones total over $280,000 and are ongoing.  He is not
willing to address them until the court assigns responsibility.  He also claims that his financial
problems have been affected by the loss of his security clearance.
In 2011, Applicant was arrested on felony charges related to an alleged sexual assault on his
then ten-year-old daughter.  His daughter had confided to her siblings that Applicant had committed
sodomy on her.  The daughter and other children were interviewed separately, the victim by an
officer with years of experience investigating this type of crime.  The victim stated that, while she
slept in her parents’ bed, she awoke to discover her father inserting his finger into her anus over her
clothes.  The lead detective testified at the hearing, stating that the victim was clear in her
description of the events and that the other children were consistent in their recollection of what the
victim subsequently told them about the incident.
3
When interviewed by the police, Applicant initially denied the charges.  He later stated that
he could have rolled over on top of the victim while he was asleep or that, if he did touch his
daughter, it was while he was asleep in a dream-like state.  He pled guilty to misdemeanor charges
of contributing to the delinquency of a minor and domestic assault and battery.  Sentenced to twelve
months on each charge, he is currently on probation.  
The court stated that Applicant was to have only supervised contact with his children.  He
claims that a family court granted him unsupervised visits with them and, moreover, that he now has
physical custody of them, including the victim.  Applicant did not corroborate these assertions.
Applicant denies that he committed any criminal acts and that his wife concocted the charges
in order to get custody of the children.  He states that he pled guilty only to spare his children the
trauma of testifying.  Applicant provided a letter from the state’s child protective service (CPS)
concluding that the charges of child abuse were unfounded.  This letter was issued before
Applicant’s plea of guilty and it is not clear if the CPS had access to all of the evidence.  Applicant
has received no counseling, due to his claims of factual innocence.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that the evidence raised concerns under all Guidelines alleged in the
SOR.  Regarding Guideline J, the Judge found Applicant’s claims of innocence to be lacking
credibility.  He also found Applicant’s testimony that he could have touched his daughter in an
inappropriate manner while he was asleep to be incredible.  He stated that, considering all of the
evidence–the testimony of the lead detective, the victim’s immediate reporting of the crime, and the
consistency of the details provided by Applicant’s family to the police–Applicant did indeed assault
his daughter, a serious offense.  The Judge also stated that Applicant’s conduct raised concerns
under Guideline D.  Moreover, Applicant’s financial problems showed irresponsible behavior that
raised questions about his fitness for a clearance.
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s lack of remorse undercut his case for mitigation of the
Guidelines J and D concerns.  He also stated that Applicant had failed to mitigate evidence of his
habitual overspending and his failure to address his debts.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge
stated that the favorable evidence in the record was not sufficient to overcome the seriousness and
recency of Applicant’s criminal conduct and his “complete disregard” for his financial obligations.
Id. at 9.
Discussion
Applicant’s Appeal
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that he had assaulted his daughter.  We
examine a Judge’s findings of fact to see if they are supported by “such relevant evidence as a
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Evidence of Applicant’s plea of guilty and the
4
testimony of the detective, inter alia, support the challenged finding.  Moreover, Applicant’s denial
of guilt after having pleaded guilty supports the Judge’s analysis that he denies responsibility for his
conduct.  Similarly, the Judge’s adverse findings and conclusions under Guideline F are sustainable.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.” 
Cross-Appeal
Department Counsel contends that the Judge erred in denying a motion to hold the record
open for the submission of rebuttal evidence, a police report.  In light of our disposition of
Applicant’s appeal, this issue is moot.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-21190 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 12,
2007).  
Department Counsel contends that the Judge erred in denying a pre-hearing amendment.
Specifically, one week prior to the hearing, Department Counsel sent Applicant an amendment to
the SOR, incorporating the existing allegations under Guideline E.  Department Counsel argues on
cross-appeal that the Judge erred in treating this as a proposal to amend the SOR at the hearing
rather than as a pre-hearing amendment already accomplished.  To the extent that the Judge erred
in his analysis of the amendment, the error was harmless, insofar as his ruling on this issue had no
effect on his overall disposition of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0988 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov.
29, 2006).  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.       
Signed; Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
