 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01143 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 16, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 19, 2014, and the hearing 
was convened as scheduled on March 10, 2014. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A that was 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left open until March 17, 2014, 
to provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. He timely submitted 
additional documents that were marked as AE B and C and admitted into evidence 
without objection. The prehearing guidance sent to Applicant was marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as HE 2. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2014. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to amend the amount in 
SOR ¶ 1.l to reflect $7,989 instead of $14,347.19, and amend the amount in SOR ¶ 1.m 
to reflect $6,154 instead of $11,050.46. Applicant had no objections to the proposed 
amendments. Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR was granted.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old aircraft mechanic who works for a defense contractor. 
He has been working for his current employer since April 2013. He graduated from high 
school in 2000 and recently started attending college. He served on active duty in the 
U.S. Marine Corps from August 2000 to August 2005, attained the grade of corporal   
(E-4), and received an honorable discharge. He married in 2004, separated in 2012, 
and reunited with his wife in 2013. He has two children, ages six and eight. This is the 
first time that he has sought to obtain a security clearance.2  
 
 Under Guideline F, the amended SOR alleged that Applicant had 25 delinquent 
debts, totaling $30,319 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.y). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that he 
was arrested for uttering a fraudulent check under $500 in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.a); that he 
falsified his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated April 
17, 2013, by failing to disclose that fraudulent check arrest (SOR 2.b); that he was 
charged with simple possession of marijuana in 1999 (SOR ¶ 2.c); that he was arrested 
and charged with driving under the influence (DUI), drunkenness, and underage 
consumption in 2001 (SOR ¶ 2.d); that he was arrested and charged with driving while 
impaired (DWI), expired registration, no insurance, and open container in 2002 (SOR ¶ 
2.e); and that he falsified his e-QIP by failing to disclose the alcohol and drug charges 
noted above (SOR ¶ 2.f). In his Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the Guideline F 
allegations. He admitted the allegations pertaining to the arrests in 1999, 2001, and 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 9-10.  
 
2 Tr. at 4-6, 20-24, 47-50; GE1; AE C. Applicant testified that his final rank was sergeant (E-5). 
See Tr. 21. 
 
 
3 
 
2009, denied the allegation regarding the arrest in 2002, and did not respond to the two 
falsification allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.3 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Upon his discharge from the Marine Corps, Applicant worked for a company as a 
machinist from August 2005 to October 2012. In 2009, he was laid off that job for about 
a month. He eventually left that job because work slowed down and additional layoffs 
were imminent. He then worked for another company as a machinist until April 2013 
before starting his current job.4  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to bad money management. He 
indicated he had no excuse for those problems. Once he incurred the delinquent debts, 
he did not have extra money available to resolve them. He provided no proof of 
payments toward any of the alleged debts and has not contacted the creditors to inquire 
about possible repayment arrangements.5 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. On September 5, 2013, he 
submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected his total net monthly 
income was $2,544, that his total monthly expenses were $2,317, and that his total 
monthly debt payments were zero, which left him a net monthly remainder of $227. He 
listed no assets. Since filing the PFS, he has started college and receives about $715 a 
month in GI Bill benefits. He testified that he had about $500 in a savings account and 
$4,200 in a retirement account. He was expecting to receive a tax refund for 2013 and 
indicated that he would use that money to pay debts. However, he also stated that he 
was recently notified that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) was auditing him because 
of a 401(k) withdrawal he made in 2012 while he was unemployed. He thought the IRS 
was seeking about $2,600 for that 401(k) withdrawal.6 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In 1999, Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana when he was 17 
years old. He was convicted of that offense, fined, and spent 24 hours in jail. Because 
of that offense, he was expelled from high school and had to repeat his senior year. 
During an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, Applicant did not bring up 
this conviction until confronted by the investigator about it. In that interview, he also 
stated that he used marijuana about 20 times when he was 16 or 17 years old and had 
not used it since then.7   
                                                          
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
4 Tr. at 21-24, 34-35; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 21-27, 35-36, 52; GE 1, 2, 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 27-36, 52; GE 2.  
 
7 Tr. at 42-44; GE 2, 5, 6.  
 
 
4 
 
 While serving in the Marine Corps in 2001, he was arrested for an on-base DUI 
and drunkenness. During that incident, his blood alcohol content was .11 percent. He 
was taken into custody and released to a senior noncommissioned officer. For the DUI 
offense, he was awarded nonjudicial punishment (45 days restriction, 45 days extra 
duty, and a forfeiture of half a month’s pay for two months) and lost his on-base driving 
privileges for a period.8   
 
 In 2002, Applicant was arrested by civilian authorities for DWI, expired state 
registration, operating a vehicle with no insurance, and possessing an open container of 
alcohol. Before his arrest, he was kicked out of a nightclub and the bouncer would not 
let him back in to contact his designated driver. As he moved a car in the parking lot, he 
was arrested. He had a blood alcohol level of .17 percent. He pled guilty to the DWI 
offense and was fined. He also had his driving privileges suspended and was required 
to attend alcohol classes. In his Answer to the SOR, he denied this offense stating, “I 
have only one DUI on my record. I was arrested in 2001 but did not go to court until 
2002 because my case was postponed due to me deploying overseas.”9  
 
 In Section 22 of the e-QIP, Applicant responded “No” to the question that asked 
whether he ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. He testified 
that he thought he only had to report any offenses that occurred in the past ten years 
and indicated he misread the question.10 
 
 In 2009, Applicant was arrested for uttering a fraudulent check under $500. He 
testified that his wife bounced the check and did not tell him about it. He learned of the 
bounced check when his cousin, who worked in the local sheriff’s office, told him that a 
bond was issued for his arrest. He testified that his cousin drove him to the police 
station in the back of a patrol car. In responding to interrogatories, he stated, “I drove 
there in my own vehicle.” At the police station, he was booked and released. He later 
appeared before a judge, was convicted of that offense, and paid a fine that included 
restitution for the bounced check. During the OPM interview, he did not bring up this 
conviction until confronted by the investigator about it. He testified that, when he was 
filling out his e-QIP, he simply forgot about this arrest and indicated that omission was 
not intentional.11 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter indicating that Applicant was an outstanding 
member of the team. He noted that Applicant is punctual and was well respected. 
Applicant has been promoted since being hired there about a year ago. In the Marine 
Corps, Applicant was awarded the Good Conduct Medal, Global War on Terrorism 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 42-44; GE 2, 7.  
 
9 Tr. at 44-47; GE 2, 8, 9; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
 
10 Tr. at 45-47, 50-52; GE 2.  
 
11 Tr. at 36-42, 50-52; GE 5, 6. 
 
 
5 
 
Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Humanitarian Service 
Medal, Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, Defense Service Medal, Navy Unit 
Commendation, Meritorious Mast, and Rifle Sharpshooter Badge.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 21, 47-48; AE C. 
 
 
6 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy over an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to poor money management and 
provided little evidence to mitigate the security concerns arising from those debts. He 
has not recently contacted the creditors in an attempt to resolve these debts. No proof 
of payments or repayment arrangements was submitted. His financial problems are 
ongoing and continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
Applicant possessed marijuana when he was 17 years old. As a young enlisted 
Marine, he had two alcohol-related driving offenses. In 2009, he was convicted of 
uttering a fraudulent check under $500. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) apply to those offenses. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant responded “No” to both questions in Section 22 of an e-QIP that asked 
about his police record. Regarding the alleged falsifications, it merits noting that his 
inconsistent statements about his criminal conduct raised questions about his credibility. 
For example, he claimed in his Answer to the SOR that he only had one DUI on his 
record, while the evidence clearly established that he was punished for an on-base 
drunk driving offense in 2001 and was punished for an off-base drunk driving offense in 
2002. Additionally, he stated in his response to the interrogatories that he drove himself 
to the police station during his 2009 fraudulent check arrest, but then testified that his 
cousin drove him to the police station in back of a patrol car. He claimed that he did not 
report his alcohol or drug offenses on the e-QIP, because he misread the applicable 
question and thought he was only required to report offenses that occurred in the past 
ten years. The wording of the applicable question in Section 22, however, is 
unambiguous. This e-QIP section clearly differentiated between law enforcement events 
that must be reported if they occurred in the past seven years and those that must be 
reported if they “EVER” occurred, with alcohol and drug charges falling in the latter 
category. Furthermore, Applicant claimed that he failed to report his 2009 fraudulent 
check conviction because he forgot about that incident. I did not find his explanations for 
his e-QIP omissions to be believable. Sufficient evidence was presented to establish 
that Applicant falsified his responses to questions in Section 22 by deliberately failing to 
disclose information about his criminal record. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 
2.b and 2.f.  
 
AG ¶ 17 lists several Personal Conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
9 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s drug and alcohol offenses occurred at least 11 years ago. There is no 
indication that he has an ongoing drug or alcohol problem. His bounced check offense 
occurred about five years ago. He stated that his wife uttered the fraudulent check. It is 
plausible that he took responsibility for that bounced check to protect his wife. AG ¶ 
17(c) applies to the drug, alcohol, and bounced check offenses.   
 
Applicant’s deliberate failure to report the drug, alcohol, and bounced check 
offenses on his e-QIP remains a security concern. Those falsifications occurred about a 
year ago. Sufficient time has not elapsed to conclude that Applicant has reformed and 
rehabilitated himself and that such falsifications are unlikely to recur. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply to those falsifications.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
While Applicant served honorably in the Marine Corps and is a valued employee 
in his current job, his delinquent debts and e-QIP falsifications raise serious questions 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under the personal conduct and financial considerations guidelines.  
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y:  Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.e:  For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.f:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.                                   
   
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
