1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00907
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on March 22, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 28, 2013, detailing security
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG),
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Response to SOR; GE 1; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 18-20.2
GE 1; GE 2; AE C; Tr. 17-18.3
2
Applicant received the SOR on November 4, 2013, and he answered it on
November 15, 2013. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on January 24, 2014, and I received the case assignment on
February 10, 2014. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 25, 2014, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on March 26, 2014. The Government offered
exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 4, which were received and admitted into
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted three exhibits (AE) marked
as AE A through AE C, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 2, 2014. I held the record
open until  April 2, 2014, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely
submitted AE  D, which was received and admitted without objection. The record closed
on April 2, 2014.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and
1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to1
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 33 years old, works as a procurement manager for a DOD
contractor. He began working for his employer in December 2002. His employer
promoted him to his current position in 2009. DOD granted Applicant a security
clearance in 2005. Applicant never worked on the project for which he obtained the
clearance, but his clearance remained active and valid until 2012 when it was revoked
by the DOD for admitted marijuana use.2
Applicant graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree in industrial
technology in 2002 and received a master’s degree in business administration in 2007.
After dating for three years, Applicant and his wife married in August 2012. They have a
one-month-old daughter.3
GE 1; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 19, 22-23, 26-27, 29-32, 42-44.4
GE 1; GE 4; Tr. 23-24, 40.5
AE A; Tr. 25-26.6
Tr. 20-22, 30, 32-36.7
3
As a college senior, Applicant smoked marijuana on three separate occasions
between the fall of 2001 and graduation in 2002. Applicant reported his college use of
marijuana on his November 7, 2005 security clearance application. After receiving the
job offer from his employer, Applicant submitted to a pre-employment drug test. The test
results were negative. Four years later, in 2006, Applicant attended a gathering of his
younger brother’s college friends or acquaintances at his brother’s house. He took a few
puffs on a marijuana cigarette and ate a cupcake containing marijuana that evening. He
also smoked marijuana once in 2007, 2008, and 2010, the details unknown. Applicant
does not have any contact with the friend or friend of a friend with whom he smoked
marijuana or ate it in baked goods. His brother does not have contact with his college
friends who used marijuana.4
In 2011, Applicant’s wife purchased a small amount marijuana to try because she
had not previously smoked marijuana. Applicant and his wife smoked one marijuana
cigarette over two nights. Applicant and his wife honeymooned in Europe in the fall
2012. Applicant legally purchased the marijuana at a store in the Netherlands after he
lost his security clearance. They smoked the marijuana during the three days they
visited the Netherlands. Applicant and his wife decided not to smoke marijuana in the
future as they wanted to start a family. Applicant has not used marijuana since 2012
and has changed his lifestyle to include healthy eating and exercise.  5
After Applicant learned that a self-drug test could be admitted into evidence, he
called his doctor on February 7, 2014 and requested his doctor to schedule a drug test
for him. He appeared for his drug test on February 10, 2014. The results were negative
for any drugs.  6
Applicant believes his employer has a drug policy, but he has not seen the policy.
He knows that illegal drug use is against company policy. He received his security
clearance in 2005, but he does not remember any training directly related to illegal drug
use. He does recall coworkers receiving training about use of classified systems just
before they began working on a classified program. He had some security training over
the years, but he was not specific about the type. He knows that he must abide by the
laws and that he could not be involved in criminal activity after he received his security
clearance. Applicant acknowledged that marijuana was illegal and that he knew it was
illegal for him to use it.    7
Applicant explained that he decided to purchase and use marijuana in the
Netherlands because he had lost his security clearance and did not expect that he
would ever regain his security clearance. After the hearing, Applicant signed a letter of
GE 1; GE 4; AE D; Tr. 37-38, 47.8
4
intent not to use marijuana again. He made a similar statement in his personal subject
interview and on his March 2013 e-QIP. He does not crave or desire marijuana.8
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Applicant smoked marijuana three times as a college student. Four years after
college graduation and after he had been granted a security clearance, Applicant again
smoked marijuana and ate a brownie containing marijuana at a party with his brother’s
college friends. Applicant smoked marijuana about once a year in 2007, 2008, 2010,
and 2011, A security concern is raised under AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g). Because
marijuana is legal in the Netherlands, he did not violate any laws and a security concern
is not raised by his use of marijuana in 2012.
6
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Applicant’s casual and infrequent use of marijuana occurs in social situations. His
last use of marijuana occurred less than 18 months ago. His brother no longer
associates with his college friends who smoked marijuana, and Applicant does not
associate with individuals who smoke marijuana. Applicant expressed an intent not to
smoke marijuana or use other illegal drugs in the future. Based on his testimony and a
review of the record, I find that there is little likelihood that Applicant will use marijuana
in the future. SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b are found in favor of Applicant.
However, Applicant has not fully mitigated the security concerns raised under this
guideline because he smoked marijuana, an illegal drug, while holding a security
clearance. When he carried out this conduct, he betrayed a sacred trust given to him by
the United States government. He exercised poor judgment when he decided to use
illegal drugs. He did so when he knew it was against the rules at work and would impact
his eligibility for a security clearance. The SOR allegation in ¶ 1.c is found against
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
experimented with marijuana as a college student, which was over 12 years ago. His
experimentation in college is not a security concern.
In 2006, after four years of abstinence, Applicant decide to smoke marijuana with
his brother at a party. Approximately once a year since 2006, he smoked marijuana
socially. During this time he held a security clearance, even though he was not working
on classified projects. He generally understood the rules of conduct for holding a
security clearance, which included maintaining his finances, avoiding criminal conduct,
and following the law. He chose not to comply with the rules for holding a security
clearance or the law, which reflects on his trustworthiness and reliability. While the
purchase of marijuana is legal in the Netherlands, his decision to smoke it because he
was not going to have a security clearance reflects an attitude favorable to the use of
marijuana. His recent expression of an intent to avoid marijuana use in the future
indicates a move in the right direction. At this time, it is too soon to determine if he is
willing to stay away from marijuana.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement
under Guideline H.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
