 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01021 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 14, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Applicant used marijuana in 2010 while holding a security clearance. He then 
intentionally omitted his drug use on his April 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2013, Applicant submitted an e-QIP for a periodic review. On October 
22, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on November 12, 2013. Applicant 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge in a letter dated January 24, 2014. 
The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 2014, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on March 26, 2014. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf and called two witnesses. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
for the government contractor for 30 years. He has held a security clearance for almost 
20 years. He possesses a bachelor’s degree. He has been married to his second wife 
for ten years, and has four adult children with his first wife. (GE 1; Tr. 25-26, 32.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana in 2010 while possessing a DOD 
Secret security clearance. The SOR also alleged that Applicant deliberately omitted his 
marijuana use in 2010, and that he used marijuana in 2010 while holding a security 
clearance, on his April 2013 e-QIP. In his Answer and during his testimony, Applicant 
admitted all of the allegations contained in the SOR pertaining to his marijuana use and 
his intentional falsification of two responses on his e-QIP. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in 1974 while in high school. He used marijuana 
“about every day” from 1974 to 1979. He testified, “there was kind of a drug culture in 
[his city], and I was on the periphery and sometimes in the middle of it. And there was 
marijuana everywhere.” However, he stopped using marijuana when he became active 
in a church. He disassociated himself from his drug-using friends at that time. (GE 2; AE 
A; Tr. 31-32, 37-38.) 
 
 In 1984, Applicant began employment with a government contractor. His 
employer has a policy that does not permit use of illegal substances. Applicant was 
aware of this policy. He was also aware of Federal and state laws criminalizing 
marijuana use. (GE 1; Tr. 36.) 
 
 For a week during the summer of 2010, Applicant hosted a friend from out of 
town. Applicant had not seen his friend for 25 years. Applicant had used marijuana with 
his friend during their youth. They were sympathizing over parenting difficulties when his 
friend offered Applicant a marijuana cigarette. Applicant smoked the marijuana 
cigarette. Applicant only used marijuana once during his friend’s visit. Applicant has not 
seen his friend since his 2010 visit. The friend is now deceased. Applicant realized after 
his friend departed that he had erred in smoking marijuana, but Applicant did not report 
his marijuana use to his facility security officer (FSO) or human resources officer. He 
recognized that his marijuana use was “irresponsible.” He does not intend to use illegal 
substances again. (AE A; Tr. 29-31, 35, 39-43, 47.) 
 
 
3 
 
 On April 9, 2013, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Section 23, entitled “Illegal Use 
of Drugs or Drug Activity” asked Applicant: “In the last seven (7) years, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance? Use of a drug or controlled substance includes 
injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise consuming any 
drug or controlled substance.” Applicant answered, “No.”  Section 23 also inquired, 
“While Possessing a Security Clearance Have you EVER illegally used or otherwise 
been involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance 
other than previously listed?” Applicant answered, “No.” Applicant intentionally falsified 
his e-QIP because he was afraid it would affect his employment and security clearance 
if he told the truth about his marijuana use. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 44.) 
 
 Applicant testified that after he submitted his e-QIP, he felt guilty for having 
falsified Section 23. He claimed he spoke to a mentor at his company who was a senior 
member of management. He disclosed his marijuana use and subsequent falsification 
to his mentor and was advised he should tell the truth. (AE A; Tr. 27-29, 48, 67-69.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized agent for the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in May 2013. During the interview Applicant disclosed his 
marijuana use, as stated above. He testified that he, “needed to make what [he]’d done 
right,” so he disclosed it to the investigator. (GE 2; Tr. 49.) 
  
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by Applicant’s 
friend and subordinate, who testified on his behalf. Applicant is known at work as a 
“very good, moral, upstanding person.” Additionally, Applicant’s wife testified on his 
behalf. She expressed her frustration with Applicant’s choice to use marijuana and 
indicated she would not tolerate future use. (Tr. 58-61, 63.) 
 
 Applicant is credited for his civic involvement coaching sports, chaperoning 
events, and supporting his local schools. He has acted as a “church leader” and has 
assisted in counseling drug users through his church. (AE A; Tr. 33-35.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
5 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant used marijuana in 2010 while 
holding a security clearance. The facts established through the Government’s evidence 
and through Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under all of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used marijuana on a daily basis from 1974 to 1979. He abstained from 
using it for 31 years, from 1979 to 2010. In 2010 he used marijuana with an old friend 
he had not seen for 25 years. Applicant’s decision to use marijuana in 2010, while 
possessing a security clearance, was in clear violation of his employer’s prohibition, 
security regulations, Federal law, and state law. His decision to use marijuana in 2010 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Given that he 
used it again after 31 years of abstinence, I cannot hold that future use is unlikely to 
recur. In this instance, an appropriate period of abstinence has not been demonstrated. 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) has limited application. Applicant stated that he does not intend to 
use marijuana in the future. His wife is supportive of his decision to refrain from 
marijuana use. The friend he used marijuana with in 2010 is now deceased. These are 
factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, as noted above, Applicant has not yet 
demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence. Further, the evidence does not 
contain an explicit “signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation.” Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof 
to overcome the concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant was dishonest about his marijuana use. He deliberately omitted his 
2010 marijuana use on his April 2013 e-QIP. He knew his actions were illegal, a 
violation of security policies, and in violation of his employer’s policies. Additionally, his 
marijuana use created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, and is an 
activity that could affect his personal, professional, or community standing. Using 
marijuana and later falsifying his e-QIP demonstrate that he lacked good judgment to 
comply with rules and regulations that are counter to his desires. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant corrected the falsifications concerning his 2010 marijuana use while 
possessing a security clearance on his e-QIP when he disclosed it to the OPM agent in 
May 2013. His disclosure to the agent was before he was confronted with facts to the 
contrary, but his disclosure was not prompt or timely. Applicant waited until the routine 
interview with the OPM agent to disclose his falsification to the Government. That 
disclosure took place approximately three years after the marijuana use and about a 
month after the falsifications. While he may have discussed the falsifications with a 
member of management who urged him to be truthful, this disclosure was not 
independently corroborated. Further it was not an attempt “to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification,” but appears to have been done in confidence without the 
incident having been further reported to human resources or the FSO. Applicant clearly 
knew he made a mistake when he was not honest on his e-QIP. Yet, he procrastinated 
reporting his deliberate omission of material information. The evidence does not support 
the full application of AG ¶ 17(a). 
 
 Applicant’s eventual disclosure of his marijuana use does not mitigate the 
concerns relating to his poor judgment and resulting vulnerability to coercion. He made 
poor decisions to violate laws, security procedures, and company policies when he used 
marijuana. He failed to produce sufficient evidence that similar lapses in judgment are 
unlikely to recur, without the passage of more time or other evidence that demonstrates 
trustworthiness and good judgment. He has not obtained counseling or taken other 
steps to indicate future use is unlikely to occur. The evidence does not show AG ¶¶ 
17(c) and 17(d) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant has earned an excellent reputation at work. However, not enough time 
has passed to know whether Applicant could again be tempted and persuaded to violate 
laws or other rules for his own personal benefit, as he did when he knowingly used 
marijuana after being granted a security clearance. AG ¶ 17(e) is not supported by the 
record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is highly respected 
by those who know him. He has not used marijuana since 2010. He has divulged 
information about his drug use, although not always in an expedient manner. He 
testified that he will not use illegal substances in the future. His wife testified she would 
not tolerate future drug use. However, Applicant was a 53-year-old mature adult with a 
high level of responsibility in his company. Yet he knowingly violated laws, security 
procedures, and company policies. His marijuana use occurred after 31 years of 
abstinence. Not enough time has passed since Applicant’s drug use in 2010 to permit a 
finding that future drug use is unlikely to occur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
