 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-00134 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding foreign influence and 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in July 2012. On July 
15, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an answer dated July 27, 2013, Applicant admitted all allegations and 
requested a decision without hearing. On September 25, 2014, the Government 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), which included nine attachments. The 
final attachment was a request for administrative notice regarding Lebanon. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2014, by the 
 
 
 
 
2 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). After receiving the official case file, I 
reviewed its contents in its entirety.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of Lebanon. It was accepted into the record as part of the 
FORM. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Various facts pertaining to Lebanon were 
derived from the offered request and its attachments; other facts are derived by similar 
Government publications introduced in other DOHA cases and commonly known.  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Lebanon is a republic with an 
imperfect human rights record. Lebanese security forces arbitrary arrest, detention, and 
torture of detainees is a problem. Militias and non-Lebanese forces from outside the 
central government’s authority frequently violate citizens’ privacy rights.  
 
Lebanon has both a long history of civil war and of foreign influence by Syria. 
Syria has been designated by the United States as a state sponsor of terrorism, 
providing support to Hezbollah. From 1976 to 2005, Syria maintained troops in Lebanon 
and the Syrian military is believed to maintain intelligence assets in Lebanon. Lebanon 
is not a state sponsor of terrorism. It is, however, a permissive environment for groups 
recognized by the U.S. as terrorist organizations. The Lebanese government recognizes 
Hezbollah as a legitimate resistance group and political party. Hezbollah is a Lebanese-
based radical group that is the most technically capable terrorist group in the world. The 
United States remains extremely concerned about the role Hezbollah plays in Lebanon.  
 
The U.S. State Department maintains a travel warning for U.S. citizens 
contemplating travel to Lebanon. Lebanon is not known to be a collector of intelligence 
or economic information against the U.S.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 49-year-old linguist working in the defense sector. Born and raised in 
Lebanon, he immigrated to the United States in 1982. Applicant married in 1987. The 
couple subsequently had four children, all of whom were born in the United States. 
Applicant was granted a United States passport in 2007. He self-identified as a dual-
citizens until he formally renounced his Lebanese citizenship in 2012. He has not 
earned an academic diploma or degree, or served in any military. Applicant has been 
highly praised by his professional superiors and peers for his skills and service. 
 
 The SOR states (1.a-1.c), and Applicant admits, that Applicant’s father, his 
brother and his brother’s wife, and three sisters and two of their husbands are citizens 
 
 
 
 
3 
and residents of Lebanon. Also noted (SOR at 1.d) is that Applicant’s mother-in-law is a 
citizen of Lebanon residing in the United States. Regarding these kin, Applicant noted: 
 
- Applicant’s father lives in a nursing home in Lebanon, for which an 
unspecified sister of Applicant pays for his care. The father sometimes stays 
with this unspecified sister; 
 
- Applicant’s brother and the brother’s “x-wife” still remain in Lebanon. (Answer 
to SOR) Applicant does not know his brother’s current address. Applicant had 
not had contact with his brother for six months before his July 2013 SOR 
response. Applicant noted that if he did have contact “past that time, it would 
be on Facebook or Skype.” (Answer to SOR); 
 
- Applicant offered the names of his three sisters in Lebanon. One sister is a 
widow and the other two sisters are divorcées. Applicant does not know their 
present addresses. He communicates with them through Facebook and 
Skype. He offered no information regarding the divorcées’ husbands; 
 
- Applicant offered a copy of his mother-in-law’s green card, but no other 
information about her was given except for her United States address, which 
is in the vicinity of Applicant’s home. 
 
 Also at issue in the SOR are two debt-related allegations. (SOR 2.a-2.b) First, 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2007, and the included debts were 
discharged the following year. Second, Applicant was past due on a mortgage in the 
approximate amount of $160,000. This account remained unpaid through at least the 
date of the July 2013 SOR. Applicant admits both allegations.  
 
 Little insight is provided regarding the bankruptcy in Applicant’s response to the 
SOR. He noted, however, that he has “had a hard time paying mortgage cause (sic) I 
have 3 kids in colleges. I tried with Bank to get a loan modification multiple times, but [it] 
refused.” (Answer to SOR) Applicant continued by noting that he had hired a particular 
lawyer to help him “on this process,” explaining he had lost his linguist job in April 2013 
after six years of service due to a reduction in force. He wrote that “everything is on hold 
now until I go back [to work], but I can’t without my clearance.” He asserts that returning 
to work will help him get “back on track” financially. He additionally notes that he has 
incurred one jaywalking ticket since coming to the United States. Applicant provided 
several highly positive recommendations from former colleagues.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, 
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
 
 
 
 
5 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has various family members who are Lebanese citizens, residents, or 
both. These include a father, siblings, spouses of siblings, and a mother-in-law. He 
maintains contact with most, if not all of them. Therefore, I find that the following 
disqualifying conditions arise under AG ¶ 7: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country 
by providing that information. 
 
In finding these conditions applicable, I specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) requires 
substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk required to raise a 
disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist groups and other criminal 
organizations operate within Lebanon. Moreover, the Lebanese government recognizes 
Hezbollah as a legitimate resistance group and political party. These facts are sufficient 
to find a heightened risk exists in this case. In addition, foreign family ties can pose a 
security risk even without a connection to a foreign government. This is because an 
Applicant may be subject to coercion or undue influence when a third party pressures or 
threatens an Applicant’s family members. Under these facts, a third party coercion 
concern potentially exists in Lebanon. The evidence provided is sufficient to note a 
heightened risk and to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., and 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
allegations.  
 
Here, the primary concern is Applicant’s relationships with his father, siblings, his 
siblings’ spouses, and his mother-in-law. Other than the fact Applicant apparently 
maintains contact with his siblings via Facebook and Skype, little is offered regarding 
these family members abroad or his relationships with them. Consequently, it is as 
difficult to examine Applicant’s foreign family members as it is to weigh his closeness to 
his extended family against his ties to the United States. Although there is clearly no 
suggestion of disloyalty on the part of Applicant, more information needs to be provided 
in order for Applicant to carry his burden in this matter. Given these factors, I find that 
none of the available mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, Applicant admitted that he availed himself of Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection in 2007 and that he is past due to his mortgagor in the approximate amount 
of $160,000. While bankruptcy is a legitimate avenue for addressing unwieldy debt, the 
past-due mortgage poses considerable concern. Therefore, I find that two financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions apply:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s mortgage became past due as a result of his loss of work after a 
reduction in force. Lacking sufficient income to pay for his obligations, including the 
mortgage, he sought a home loan modification. His requests were rebuffed by his bank. 
He then solicited the help of an attorney. Such facts are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(b) in 
terms of his acquisition of the considerable past-due debt at issue.  
 
Applicant failed, however, to provide any documentary evidence of his lawyer’s 
efforts on his behalf or, in fact, any documentation regarding any attempts to address 
the past-due mortgage. While there is no reason to suspect Applicant’s written 
comments are not accurate and sincere, this process requires some level of 
documentation to support one’s narrative regarding actions taken to address one’s 
debts. Here, the record is deficient in terms of documentation offered to show that 
Applicant has a reasonable plan to address his debt, and has successfully implemented 
that plan. Without such evidence, none of the other mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the two guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant is 49-year-old linguist working in the defense sector. Born and raised in 
Lebanon, he immigrated to the United States in 1982. He married in 1987, and the 
couple has four children. Applicant has never served in the military of any country. He 
does not have an academic degree or diploma. He has been highly praised for his work 
as a linguist.   
 
Applicant admitted all allegations regarding his family members who are citizens 
and residents of Lebanon, and regarding his mother-in-law, who is a citizen of Lebanon 
living in the United States near Applicant and his wife. Unfortunately, the information he 
offered about those relations, their families, and his relationships with them is scant, and 
the information offered regarding Applicant’s life in the United States is far from 
thorough. Such deficiencies undermine a proper analysis under the AG for foreign 
influence.  
 
While Applicant’s 2007 bankruptcy may raise general financial issues, his notably 
large past-due balance on his mortgage raises serious financial security concerns. His 
written narrative reflects that he initially took reasonable steps to deal with the financial 
hardships that followed his loss of employment following a reduction in force. However, 
the absence of documentation supporting Applicant’s narrative confounds a proper 
analysis under the AG.  
 
In these proceedings, the burden is placed squarely on the Applicant. Here, 
Applicant failed that burden due to insufficient information and documentation. 
Consequently, I find that foreign influence and financial considerations security 
concerns remain unmitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
