 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00984   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security 
clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen 
originally from Syria. He has mitigated the foreign influence concern raised by his 
familial contacts and property interest in Syria. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on December 9, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. I received the transcript 
(Tr.) on December 17, 2013. 
 
After the hearing, Department Counsel discovered that Applicant did not receive 
the most recent copy of the Directive when the SOR was issued. On January 17, 2013, 
Chief Department Counsel provided Applicant with a current copy of the Directive and 
gave Applicant 30 days to decide whether or not he wanted to submit additional 
evidence. Applicant received the letter on January 27, 2013 and chose not to submit 
any additional information. The record closed on March 13, 2014.3 
 
Procedural Issues 
  
Waiver of Notice Requirement 
 
 Applicant received less than 15 days written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing as required under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8. Applicant waived the notice requirement, 
electing to proceed with the hearing as scheduled.4  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Syria. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was granted. 
The written summary, along with its attachments, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1.5  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 47, is an executive-level employee of a federal contractor, specializing 
in information technology issues. He has worked for the same company since 1999. 
Applicant requires a security clearance for his work as a consultant to a directorate 
within the highest ranks of DOD leadership. According to the senior-level director with 
whom Applicant works most closely, Applicant worked with classified information in a 
secure office environment while he had an interim clearance prior to the issuance of the 
SOR. The director attested that Applicant completed the required security training, 
conducted himself within the rules of security, and complied with the directives 
                                                          
2 The letter from the Chief Administrative Judge regarding the Applicant’s rights and obligations in a 
DOHA proceeding is appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit (AP E) III. 
 
3 The correspondence related to this issue is appended to the record as AP E I-II. 
 
4 Tr. 5-6.  
 
5 Tr. 18. 
 
 
3 
 
regarding the handing of classified information. The directorate supports Applicant’s 
application for access to classified information.6 
 
Applicant is originally from Syria, a country ruled by an authoritarian regime. 
Long designated a state-sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. Department of State, Syria 
has a history of providing safe haven, as well as political and other support, to a number 
of designated Palestinian terrorist groups. The country has also provided political and 
weapons support to Lebanese Hizballah and has allowed Iran to re-arm the terrorist 
organization. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1985 to attend college at the 
encouragement of his father. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1993. He returned 
to Syria in 1989 for his wedding, but did not return for 10 years, fearing conscription into 
the Syrian military. Applicant’s wife and three children, ages 21, 19, and 17, are U.S. 
citizens by birth. In 1999, the Syrian government passed a law exempting certain Syrian 
expatriates from military service for a $15,000 fee. Applicant paid the fee, which 
provided him the opportunity to visit his parents without fear of capture when entering 
the country.7  
 
Applicant’s mother, a naturalized U.S. citizen, lives in Syria as does Applicant’s 
sister and his brother-in who are also Syrian citizens. Applicant’s mother, 74, is a retired 
lawyer. Applicant’s sister is a housewife and his brother-in-law is a university professor. 
Applicant’s relatives are financially secure, own their own homes, and do not rely on 
Applicant for financial support. Between 2000 and 2006, Applicant and his family 
traveled to Syria every summer to visit his parents. In 2006, Applicant purchased and 
renovated a vacation home for his family, near his parents’ home. He paid $600,000 
cash to purchase and renovate the home, which remained empty when Applicant and 
his family were not in the country. Applicant also maintained two bank accounts in Syria 
for the convenience of his family and to avoid entering the country with cash. Currently, 
the accounts contain only $1,500, which is typical when Applicant and his family are not 
in Syria. After his father died in 2006, Applicant and his family traveled to Syria six times 
to visit his mother. Their last trip to Syria was in 2010.8  
 
In 2010, the Syrian government’s use of deadly force to quell anti-government 
protests resulted in a full-scale civil war with the armed Syrian opposition. According to 
its assessment of the political environment in Syria, the U.S. State Department believes 
that the security situation throughout Syria is likely to remain volatile and unpredictable 
for the foreseeable future, with some areas, especially in the contested population 
centers, experiencing substantially increased levels of violence. The State Department 
has issued a travel warning advising U.S. citizens against travel to Syria and strongly 
recommends that U.S. citizens remaining in Syria depart immediately. Applicant has 
affirmatively decided neither he nor his family will return to Syria for the foreseeable 
future. Applicant agrees with the State Department’s assessment regarding the long-
                                                          
6 Tr. 22; GE 1; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. 21-23, 25, 38-40; GE 1; HE I. 
 
8 Tr. 26-27, 32-33, 35-40, 51; GE 2-3; Answer. 
 
 
4 
 
term instability of Syria. Furthermore, Applicant’s two oldest children, both young men, 
are eligible for conscription into the Syrian military even though they have never lived in 
Syria and only have citizenship by virtue of Applicant’s birth.9  
 
Applicant considers the vacation home, now worth $100,000, a loss. Although 
the home has remained unscathed by the civil war, Applicant cannot sell the home 
because the real estate market has effectively collapsed. Applicant has discussed his 
decision not to return to Syria with his mother and she supports his decision. Even 
though Applicant would like his mother to leave Syria and he has the means to 
evacuate her, she will not leave until Applicant’s sister and brother-in-law are able to 
immigrate to the United States. Applicant’s sister is the only one of Applicant’s three 
siblings to remain in Syria. Applicant’s brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His other 
sister is a citizen of Syria who has resided in Kuwait for more than 10 years with her 
husband, who is also a Syrian citizen.10  
 
In the 29 years Applicant has resided in the United States, he has accumulated 
significant financial resources. In addition to his annual compensation, which is in the 
mid-six figure range, Applicant has a net worth of over $3 million, including his home, 
retirement savings, and other real estate investments. Applicant’s net worth does not 
include the vacation home in Syria.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
9 Tr. 24-26, 51, 57; HE I.  
 
10 Tr. 28-29, 31, 37, 41-42, 54-57; Answer. 
 
11 Tr. 42-47, 49-51; GE 2-3. 
 
5 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”12 The record shows that 
Applicant has familial ties as well as property interests in Syria, which is a country 
immersed in a civil war, and is also considered a state-sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. 
Government. Applicant’s contacts and property interests create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.13 These 
relationships also have the potential to create a conflict of interest between an 
applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and his desire to 
help a foreign person.14 No such concerns exist with Applicant’s relationship with his 
sister and brother-in-law who are Syrian citizens living in Kuwait. 
 
 While Applicant’s financial interests in Syria are significant, they are not a source 
of vulnerability, exploitation, or coercion. Applicant purchased a vacation home and 
maintained two bank accounts in Syria for the enjoyment and comfort of his family 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 6.  
 
13 See AG ¶¶ 7(a), (e). 
 
14 See AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 
6 
 
during their annual visits. Applicant does not receive income from the property. 
Applicant’s testimony that he considers the home a loss is credible given his finances. 
The money Applicant invested in the home is a sunk cost and the bank accounts have 
nominal balances. Neither asset is material to Applicant’s current financial portfolio, 
which contains at least $3 million in U.S.-based assets. Taking these factors into 
consideration, it is unlikely that the property or the two bank accounts could result in a 
conflict of interest or be used as a source of coercion against Applicant.15   
 
 The gravamen of the security concern lies in Applicant’s relationships with his 
mother, sister, and brother-in-law who remain in Syria. These relationships cannot be 
dismissed as casual. Also, it is impossible to find that Applicant’s relatives will remain 
untouched by the political unrest around them even though they are financially secure 
and are not dependent on the Syrian government. However, an applicant is not required 
to sever all contact with his foreign relatives. Instead, he must provide strong evidence 
that despite these relationships, he has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflicts in favor of 
U.S. interests.  Applicant has done so.  
 
Applicant has spent his entire adult life in the United States. He is rooted to the 
United States by his wife and three children. In addition, he has worked hard to build a 
successful career, reaching high levels of corporate success. Applicant understands the 
security risks associated with his ties to his relatives in Syria. He has thoughtfully 
weighed his desire to visit his mother and sister regularly against the potential hazards 
to himself and his family of continuing to do so. Applicant articulated the greatest of his 
concerns as being his family’s safety and the possibility of his sons being conscripted 
into the Syrian military. After weighing these factors, Applicant has made the pragmatic 
decision not to return to Syria. For the second time since immigrating to the United 
States, Applicant has initiated a self-imposed exile from his family members in Syria. 
This decision comes at a great personal cost. Applicant and his mother accept the 
possibility that they may not see each other again if she chooses to remain in Syria. 
Based on the record, I am confident that Applicant will resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States.16  
 
While Applicant is connected to his relatives in Syria, the nexus of Applicant’s 
primary concerns are located in the United States. In reaching this decision, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered the 
whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has demonstrated that he 
does not have divided loyalties between the United States and Syria. Based on the 
evidence, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence concern. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15  See AG ¶ 8(f). 
 
16 See AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:    For Applicant 
  
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                                              
 
 
 
______________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
