 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 13-00916 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding finances. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in April 2013. On 
September 10, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an answer dated December 24, 2013, Applicant admitted 12 of the 14 SOR 
allegations and requested a decision based on the administrative record. On February 
10, 2014, the Government prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), which included 
six attached items. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to 
 
 
 
 
2 
me on April 9, 2014, by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). After 
receiving the official case file, I reviewed its contents in its entirety.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old warehouse specialist who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since November 11, 2011. He has a high school diploma and no 
military experience. Applicant is married and has no children. The SOR contains 14 
allegations (1.a-1.m), each allegation representing a delinquent debt. In sum, those 
debts amount to approximately $22,109. Applicant admits all allegations except the two 
noted in the SOR as 1.j and 1.k, which amount to $868. He wrote that he does not 
recognize those two accounts, but presented no documentary evidence refuting them or 
showing that they have been formally disputed.  
 
 Applicant wrote that the debts at issue were acquired through youthful 
capriciousness. They were neglected and became delinquent due to his immaturity. He 
stressed that he is now more mature.  
 
Because of his wife’s medical expenses, which are related to severe medical 
conditions that resulted in her leaving the workforce, Applicant presently has financial 
issues. He cannot support both himself and his wife on his current income. Applicant 
emphasizes that he loves his work and would not do anything to jeopardize his position.     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
 
 
3 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Here, Applicant admitted financial responsibility for over $20,000. Therefore, I 
find that two financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
4 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant offered scant information regarding the debts at issue and his general 
finances. At most, he noted that his wife’s illness presently compromises his household 
finances. If his wife’s illness and medical care caused his financial problems, AG ¶ 20(b) 
could apply in part. However, he failed to explain any reasonable efforts he has taken in 
the face of those medical bills to manage his financial situation. Indeed, he failed to 
describe any plan to address or resolve his debts. He similarly failed to show any 
progress on the debts at issue, to show a basis for his dispute of the debts noted at 
SOR allegations 1.j-1.k, to show that those two debts were ever formally disputed, or to 
show he has received financial counseling. Lacking any such documented efforts, there 
is insufficient evidence to give rise to any of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 31-year-old warehouse specialist who loves his work and has been 
with the same employer since November 2011. He has earned a high school diploma. 
When he was younger, unrestrained spending led to his acquisition of debt. That debt 
then became delinquent due to immature behavior. Today, Applicant is married. He and 
his wife have no children. Applicant presently faces adverse financial issues as a 
consequence of his wife’s medical issues and her exit from the workforce due to her ill 
 
 
 
 
5 
health. There is no evidence regarding their expenses, financial resources, or 
investments, if any. Similarly, there is no evidence showing any efforts to address the 
delinquent debts at issue, refuting the two debts that he denies, or proving he has 
received financial counseling. 
 
This process does not demand that one address all of one’s delinquent debts. It 
does, however, expect an Applicant to articulate a reasonable plan for addressing his 
delinquent debt, and documentary evidence showing that such a plan has been 
successfully implemented. Here, no such evidence has been presented. Therefore, 
Applicant failed in his burden in this matter. Financial considerations security concerns 
remain unmitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
