 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01178 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nicole A. Smith, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign preference and financial considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines C (foreign 
preference) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 16, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 28, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
March 7, 2014, scheduling the hearing for March 25, 2014. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information, and for either side to submit a brief or legal points and 
authorities. On April 2, 2014, I sent the parties an e-mail with a link to the IRS website 
asking if they wanted to comment. Department Counsel submitted a brief on April 7, 
2014, which is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant’s brief of April 15, 2014, is 
marked HE II. Correspondence about the additional exhibits is marked HE III. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Unlike foreign influence cases under Guideline B where the identity and the 
nature of the foreign country can and should be considered, Guideline C cases are 
more country-neutral. That does not mean that the country is irrelevant. I have taken 
administrative notice of certain facts about Germany, as provided by the U.S. 
Department of State.1 The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2006. He served in the U.S. military from 1975 until he 
retired in 1997. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has held since serving 
in the military. He is married for the second time. He has an adult child and two adult 
stepchildren.2 
 
 Applicant spent most of his military career overseas. When he retired from the 
military, he accepted a job working in Germany for a defense contractor. He bought a 
house in Germany in 2002 for the equivalent of about $280,000 in U.S. currency. He 
estimated that the house is worth about the same as he paid for it, and that he still owes 
the equivalent of about $165,000 on his mortgage loan. He married his current wife in 
2004. She is a German citizen. Applicant’s stepchildren are dual U.S.-German citizens.3 
 
 In order to live and work in Germany, Applicant became a German resident in 
2000. He paid taxes on his income to Germany. He also paid the German equivalent of 
Social Security. He will be eligible to receive about $200 per month from the German 
equivalent of Social Security when he reaches a certain age. He maintains a German 
                                                          
1 See http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3997.htm.  
 
2 Tr. at 20-24, 28-29, 93; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-38, 90-97, 103-104; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
bank account that he uses to pay his mortgage loan and other expenses. His main 
banking is done through a U.S. credit union.4 
 
 As a non-German and non-European Union citizen, Applicant is not able to vote 
in German elections. Non-citizens are permitted to vote for foreigners’ advisory councils, 
which are advisory boards for local politics. Applicant thought he voted one time for one 
of the foreigners’ advisory councils, but his wife later told him that she never mailed the 
ballot.5 
 
 Applicant worked in Afghanistan in 2005 and 2006. He returned to Germany 
when the contract ended. Except for leave periods, Applicant has worked in Afghanistan 
in support of Operation Enduring Freedom since he accepted his current position in 
2006. He usually goes to Germany and visits his wife during his leave periods. His 
German residency status expired in 2011. After his current assignment in Afghanistan is 
over, he may return to Germany for work. He does not intend to retire in Germany. 
Applicant credibly testified that he does not have a preference for Germany over the 
United States and that his loyalties are in and to the United States. He stated that he 
sought work overseas because the pay is better than he could have received in the 
United States.6 
 
 Applicant did not file U.S. federal income tax returns when they were due for tax 
years 1996 through 2000. He discussed his unfiled tax returns in a statement he 
provided for his background investigation in December 2001. He stated that he filed his 
returns for 1996, 1997, and 1998, and that he would file his 1999 and 2000 returns 
before the end of January 2002.7 
 
 Applicant did not file U.S. federal income tax returns when they were originally 
due for tax years 2006, 2007, and 2008. The IRS filed a substitute return for 2006 in 
August 2009. Applicant filed his 2006 return in May 2010. In June 2010 and August 
2010, the IRS imposed penalties for filing his tax return after the due date. All taxes, 
penalties, and interest have been paid for tax year 2006.8 
 
 The IRS filed substitute returns for tax years 2007 and 2008 on May 3, 2010. 
Applicant filed his 2007 and 2008 returns on May 11, 2010. In August 2010, the IRS 
imposed penalties for filing his tax returns after the due date. All taxes, penalties, and 
interest have been paid for tax years 2007 and 2008.9 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 39-54, 107-112; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 55-58, 113-115, 133-134; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-26, 31, 44-49, 59-62, 98-106, 132-133; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 127-129; GE 4. 
 
8 Tr. at 64-69, 82; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant did not become aware until a few weeks before the hearing that, 
because of his service in a combat zone in support of the armed forces, he may have 
been eligible for an automatic extension to file his income tax returns for tax years 2006, 
2007, and 2008. He has timely filed his tax returns from tax years 2009 to 2012. He 
does not owe the IRS any back taxes. He does not excuse his negligence for failing to 
file his tax returns, but he promises that he will timely file his returns in the future. His 
finances are currently sound.10 
 
  Applicant deployed and served overseas while he was on active duty. He 
submitted several letters praising his work performance, loyalty, honor, dedication, 
professionalism, work ethic, leadership, and integrity.11 
 
Germany 
 
 The United States is committed to preserving peace and security in Europe, and 
U.S.-German relations have been a focal point of U.S. involvement in Europe since the 
end of World War II. Germany stands at the center of European affairs and is a key 
partner in U.S. relations with Europeans in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) and the European Union. U.S. policy toward Germany is to preserve and 
consolidate a close and vital relationship with Germany, not only as friends and trading 
partners, but also as allies sharing common institutions. The United States recognizes 
that the security and prosperity of the United States and Germany significantly depend 
on each other. The bilateral political, economic, and security relationships are based on 
close consultation and coordination at the most senior levels, and the United States and 
Germany cooperate actively in international forums. 
 
 As allies in NATO, the United States and Germany work side by side to maintain 
peace and freedom. U.S. and German troops work together effectively in NATO and UN 
operations worldwide due in part to the joint training and capacity-building performed at 
U.S. military installations in Germany. The two countries have extended their diplomatic 
cooperation into military cooperation by maintaining peacekeeping efforts in the Balkans 
and working together to encourage the evolution of open and democratic states 
throughout central and eastern Europe. Germany has been an integral part of the UN-
mandated International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. German and U.S. 
maritime forces also are deployed to combat piracy off the Horn of Africa. Since the 
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, Germany has been a reliable 
U.S. ally in efforts against terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 72-73, 84-89, 122-127, 135-136; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A-C, E; 
http://www.irs.gov/uac/Extension-of-Deadlines-%E2%80%94-Combat-Zone-Service. 
 
11 Tr. at 120-121; AE D. 
 
5 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes the following conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 10:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country;  
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country;  
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election;  
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant acquired residency status in Germany, but he never became a German 
citizen. No specific foreign preference disqualifying condition has been raised. However, 
his actions could indicate a preference for Germany over the United States. A general 
foreign preference security concern under AG ¶ 9 has been raised, even without the 
applicability of a specific disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
 
7 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Just as there is no specific disqualifying condition applicable, no specific 
mitigating condition is applicable. While not a mitigating condition, I pay specific 
attention to the security concern identified under Guideline C that “[w]hen an individual 
acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United 
States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are 
harmful to the interests of the United States.” (AG ¶ 9) Because of Applicant’s military 
service and his service in Afghanistan in support of the U.S. military, as well as the 
close relationship between the United States and Germany, I do not find that Applicant’s 
connections and ties to Germany make him “prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file federal income tax returns when they were originally due for 
tax years 2006, 2007, and 2008. He was unaware that he may have been eligible for an 
automatic extension, and he thought he was required to file the returns.12 His failure to 
                                                          
12 Based upon the information available to the IRS at the time, the IRS imposed penalties against 
Applicant for filing his tax returns after the due date. Applicant may have rated an automatic extension of 
the deadlines to file his returns because he was “serving in a combat zone or a contingency operation in 
support of the Armed Forces.” See AE A-C, and http://www.irs.gov/uac/Extension-of-Deadlines-
 
8 
 
follow what he thought was his legal obligation shows a lack of judgment and an 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. The disqualifying conditions listed under 
AG ¶ 19 are illustrative only, not exhaustive and exclusive.13 The above disqualifying 
condition, or a derivation thereof, is applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
 Applicant has a history of not filing his tax returns when they were due. He was 
aware that was a concern to the DOD because he discussed his unfiled tax returns in a 
statement he provided for his background investigation in December 2001. Despite that 
knowledge, he was negligent in complying with what he thought was his legal obligation 
to file his tax returns for tax years 2006, 2007, and 2008. Applicant filed those returns in 
May 2010. All subsequent years have been filled in a timely manner; and all taxes, 
penalties, and interest have been paid. Applicant does not excuse his behavior, but he 
credibly testified that he will timely file his returns in the future. His finances are currently 
sound. 
 
 I find that Applicant’s financial issues have been resolved and are under control. 
They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
%E2%80%94-Combat-Zone-Service. It is unnecessary for the purpose of this decision to determine 
whether Applicant actually rated that extension because Applicant was unaware of the extension. 
 
13 See ISCR Case 08-08831 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 4, 2011). 
 
9 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence, and his honorable military 
service. He has worked overseas in support of the U.S. national defense. The Appeal 
Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United 
States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a 
Guideline B [foreign influence] case.”14 This is not a foreign influence case, but it is also 
not a classic foreign preference case. It is almost a hybrid of the two foreign guidelines. 
I am satisfied that Applicant does not have a preference for Germany over the United 
States. I am also convinced that he will comply with all tax-filing requirements in the 
future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign preference and financial considerations security concerns.15 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
15 I find Applicant mitigated his failure to file his tax returns whether he was required to file his income tax 
returns while working overseas or only thought he was required to do so. 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
