1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 13-00386
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has explained and
mitigated the foreign influence security concern based on his strong ties to the United
States, which outweigh and overcome his ties to Afghanistan. Accordingly, this case is
decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On June 14, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a statement
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  The SOR is similar1
to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline B for foreign influence based on his family ties to Afghanistan.   
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. In his answer, he
admitted the factual allegations of family ties to Afghanistan as set forth in SOR ¶¶
1.a–1.f as follows: (1) your wife, daughter, and son are citizens of Afghanistan and
residents in the United States; (2) your mother-in-law is an Afghan citizen and resident;
(3) your son-in-law is an Afghan citizen and resident in the United States and currently
employed by an Afghan ministry; and (4) your brother is an Afghan citizen and resident
in Germany. He also provided detailed explanations. 
The case was assigned to another judge on September 14, 2013, and
reassigned to me January 23, 2014. The hearing was scheduled for March 3, 2014, but
did not take place due to adverse winter weather. The rescheduled hearing on March
12, 2014, was conducted by video teleconference (VTC). The transcript (Tr.) was
received March 19, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a company engaged in defense
contracting. He works as a linguist in support of the U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan,
his country of birth. He has had this job since September 2010, and he has worked in
Afghanistan since October 2010. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance for the
first time.
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. He earned a bachelor’s degree
from an Afghan university in 1974. He along with his family left Afghanistan in 1983, due
to the Communist (Soviet Union) invasion. His father (who died in 1971) was a state
senator and was viewed as an enemy of the Communists, which necessitated the
family’s departure. They lived in India for about one year and during that time they
applied for refugee status with the United Nations. In 1984, they came to the United
States and sought political asylum, which was granted. He became a permanent
resident alien in 1990, and he obtained U.S. citizenship in April 2012.    
Applicant’s employment history in the United States is not unusual. He worked as
a driver for different companies beginning in 1988 and ending in 2010. He has since
been employed as a linguist for the same company. He completed his most recent
 Exhibits 1, 2, 3, and 4. 2
 Exhibits 5 and 6 (much of the information in the factual findings is gleaned from these documents).3
3
security clearance application in December 2012.  He underwent counterintelligence-2
focused security screening in 2010 and 2012.  On both occasions, it was concluded that3
no evidence was present to indicate that Applicant was a security risk based on the
available information at that time. 
Applicant is married with adult children. His immediate family lives in the United
States, and the status of various family members is summarized in the following table.
Relationship Country of Birth Citizenship Residence
Father Afghanistan Afghan Deceased
Mother Afghanistan Afghan Deceased
Wife Afghanistan Afghan United States
Daughter Afghanistan Afghan United States
Son Afghanistan Afghan United States
Daughter United States United States United States
Daughter United States United States United States
Mother-in-Law Afghanistan Afghan Afghanistan
Father-in-Law Afghanistan Afghan Deceased
Brother (2) Afghanistan United States United States
Brother Afghanistan Afghan Germany
Sisters (2) Afghanistan United States United States
Applicant’s wife, daughter, and son are U.S. permanent resident aliens. Applicant
has had no contact or relationship with his brother in Germany for more than 20 years.
In addition, he has two sisters-in-law (one born in Afghanistan the other in India) who
are U.S. citizens and residents. He also has a brother-in-law who was born in
Afghanistan and who is a U.S. citizen and resident. He has a son-in-law who was born
in Afghanistan who is a U.S. permanent resident alien. He was working for an Afghan
ministry, but is now employed by a contractor working in support of the U.S. armed
forces in Afghanistan. Applicant’s family members in the United States live in the same
metropolitan area. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is an Afghan citizen and resident. Applicant has little
contact with her, although his wife has an ongoing mother-daughter relationship with
 Tr. 77. 4
 Tr. 62–63. 5
 Tr. 57–59.6
 Tr. 75–78.7
 Tr. 70. 8
 Tr. 70–74.9
 Tr. 48–49. 10
 Exhibit A. 11
 Exhibit 7. 12
4
her. They do not provide financial support to the mother-in-law.  His wife traveled to4
Afghanistan within the last six months to visit her mother.  5
Applicant has a former son-in-law who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan.
Due to the divorce, the former son-in-law has expressed some anger and apparent
threats toward Applicant’s family.  The former son-in-law is located about 200 to 3006
kilometers from Applicant’s work location (a U.S. military base) in Afghanistan, and
Applicant’s last contact with him was in 2008 or 2009.7
Applicant stated that his work as a linguist in Afghanistan is dangerous duty—
“Every single step is dangerous.”  He stated that he has been subject to indirect fire and8
small arms fire on multiple occasions.  Recognizing the danger of his job, he stated that9
he does not disclose his work activities to family or friends.  He has a good record of10
employment as a linguist, which is documented by letters of recommendation, military
certificates of appreciation or achievement, military coins, and an outstanding
performance appraisal.  11
In response to Department Counsel’s written request,  I took administrative or12
official notice of certain facts about Afghanistan, and they are summarized as follows.
After the 1979 invasion and subsequent withdrawal of the then Soviet Union,
Afghanistan experienced a civil war among several factions, including the Taliban. By
the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan and provided sanctuary to
Osama bin Laden, al Qaeda, and other terrorist groups. U.S. military forces, along with
forces from a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban from power by November 2001.
With U.S. assistance and support, a new democratic government took office in 2004,
which continues to this day. In spite of efforts by the United States and the Afghan
government, Afghanistan continues to be a violent, unsafe, and unstable country, which
is subject to terrorist attacks and suicide bombings. Afghanistan’s human-rights record
is generally poor, due to the continuing insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing
recovery efforts from years of war. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to13
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 21
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).22
5
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As13
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt14
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An15
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  16
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting17
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An18
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate19
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme20
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.21
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.22
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.23
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 24
 AG ¶ 6. 25
6
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it23
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR is whether Applicant’s family ties to Afghanistan, his
country of birth, disqualify him from eligibility for a security clearance. Under Guideline B
for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt24
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.25
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s family ties to Afghanistan, I have especially considered the following
disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
7
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information.
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant, age 63, is a mature adult who is now working as a linguist in support of
the U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan, a place known as a high-risk environment for our
soldiers and the contractors who support them. He has not resided in Afghanistan since
1983 and he has lived in the United States since 1984, which are substantial periods of
time. He and his wife, adult children, and extended family reside in the United States,
and they are U.S. citizens or permanent resident aliens. The United States has been
conducting military operations in Afghanistan since 2001, and Applicant is now
performing important service in support of that mission. Taken together, his ties to the
United States are much stronger than his ties to Afghanistan, and these facts and
circumstances weigh in his favor.  
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern, and that is the situation here. Like most first-generation immigrants, Applicant
has some ties to his country of birth, primarily his mother-in-law via the close
relationship that his wife has with her mother. This should not be dismissed or
overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, because the circumstances in Afghanistan are
dangerous and unstable and create a heightened risk of foreign influence. With that
said, his ties to people in Afghanistan are normal and not extensive. In addition, any
concern about the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress due to the
former son-in-law now in Afghanistan (a matter not alleged in the SOR) is attenuated by
the passage of time, the lack of contact, the substantial distance between Applicant’s
work location and the former son-in-law, and the lack of evidence showing that the
former son-in-law is even aware of Applicant’s presence in Afghanistan. Likewise, I am
satisfied that this is not a case of “divided loyalties” as contemplated by the guideline.
Instead, I am satisfied that Applicant has both feet planted firmly in the United States
and his ties to this country are strong and will become stronger in the future. Any
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).26
8
security risk or concern presented by his ties to Afghanistan is outweighed and
overcome by his much stronger ties to the United States. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and
evaluating the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,  I conclude Applicant has26
mitigated the foreign influence security concern. In reaching this conclusion, I especially
considered the following matters: (1) the favorable results of counterintelligence-focused
security screening in 2010 and 2012; (2) his record of good employment as a linguist;
and (3) his important service in Afghanistan under difficult and dangerous conditions.
Indeed, at his age, Applicant could be sitting at home collecting Social Security
retirement benefits, instead he’s doing this job. Accordingly, I conclude he has met his
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
