 
1 
 
 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 13-00883 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nicole Smith, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
  
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns related to foreign influence and foreign 
preference. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three allegations under Guideline B, and 
denied the single allegation under Guideline C. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On 
February 27, 2014, I convened the hearing. I admitted three Government exhibits (GE 1-
3) and two Applicant exhibits (AE A-B). By email dated February 27, 2014, Applicant 
requested I hold the record open for additional documentation, and Department Counsel 
did not object. The email correspondence is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) IV. I 
                                                          
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines. They apply to all security clearance 
adjudications in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
granted the request. Applicant timely submitted two character reference letters, which I 
admitted as one document, AE C. DOHA received the transcript on March 7, 2014, and 
the record closed on March 19, 2014. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts related to Pakistan, included in nine U.S. 
Government documents provided by Department Counsel, and marked as HE II.2 I also 
take administrative notice of documents related to Pakistan submitted by Applicant, 
marked as HE III. The facts are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to 
reasonable dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 22 years old, single, and lives with his parents. He was born in 
Pakistan, and came to the United States in 2007, at the age of 16. From 2008 to 2010, 
he worked more than 40 hours per week in a retail store while attending high school, to 
help support his family. He graduated in 2011. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 21-32, 35) 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant's father has worked as a linguist in Afghanistan for a federal contractor 
since 2010, and suggested Applicant apply for the same position. In January 2012, 
Applicant moved to another state where he worked at a military base, helping train 
soldiers in the Afghan language and culture before they deployed. In March 2012, he 
accepted a full-time position with the same federal contractor as his father. After several 
months’ training, he deployed with the Army to Afghanistan as a linguist. While there, he 
accompanied the soldiers on missions to gather information on terrorist activities. The 
missions at times came under attack from roadside bombs and suicide bombers. Three 
linguists and six soldiers in his group were killed. He served in Afghanistan from June 
2012 to October 2013. Applicant's company intends to send him to Afghanistan when his 
security clearance adjudication is complete. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in April 2013. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 21-33) 
 
Applicant's parents were born in Pakistan, and currently live in the United States. 
His father became a U.S. citizen in January 2013. Applicant's mother, a homemaker, is 
also a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant's two sisters and one brother reside in the 
United States and became naturalized U.S. citizens in about December 2013. (Tr. 32-33) 
 
                                                          
2 HE I is a DOD personnel database printout showing that Applicant is currently sponsored by a federal 
contractor.  
 
3 
 
 
 Approximately 40 to 50 of Applicant's extended family members, including aunts, 
uncles, and cousins, reside in the United States. They began immigrating to the United 
States in the early 1970s. On his counterintelligence security questionnaire, Applicant 
listed 11 relatives who are U.S. citizen-residents, and whom he contacts once per week 
to once per year. He also listed 14 friends who are U.S. citizens and residents with 
whom he is in contact several times per week to once per month. Half of them work for 
the U.S. government. Along with his father, four of Applicant's relatives work for the U.S. 
government, primarily as linguists or cultural advisors. (GE 2; Tr. 33) 
 
Applicant has financial assets in the United States. He uses and makes the 
payments on a car that his father owns, as well as a motorcycle. He also has a bank 
account with a balance of approximately $120,000, which he saved from his position as 
a linguist. Applicant has no property, bank accounts, investment accounts, or other 
financial ties to Pakistan. (GE 2; AE B; Tr. 34-37) 
 
Applicant's 66-year-old maternal grandfather is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. 
In 2004, he retired from a government position with the passport and immigration 
services office. When Applicant lived in Pakistan, they were not close; he had contact 
with his grandfather once per year. Applicant does not know when he retired, or his 
current activities, because he has not spoken with his grandfather since he left Pakistan 
in 2007. Applicant estimated his mother is in touch with her father about twice per year 
by telephone, but Applicant does not talk to him. (GE 2; Tr. 37-41) 
 
Applicant has extended family members who are citizen-residents of Pakistan, 
including an uncle and his two sons, Applicant's cousins. His uncle is a pilot, retired from 
the Pakistani Air Force. He is now a commercial pilot for a Pakistani airline. He is also a 
legal U.S. resident. He owns a home in the United States and comes to the United 
States about twice per year. Applicant last saw his uncle in 2008. His two sons, Cousin A 
and Cousin B, are members of the Pakistani Air Force. As a child in Pakistan, Applicant 
saw his cousins about once per year. He last saw his two cousins in 2007, before he left 
Pakistan. Applicant has had no contact with this family since 2008 because Applicant's 
family has not been on speaking terms with them since that time. (GE 2; Tr. 41-61) 
 
Applicant has three others cousins who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
Cousins C is a pilot in the Pakistani Air Force. Cousins D and E are in the Pakistani 
Army. When he lived in Pakistan, Applicant saw them about once a year until. After 
about age ten, he saw them once every five years. He saw them infrequently because 
his family did not have a good relationship with them. Applicant has not seen Cousins C, 
D, or E since 2006 or 2007, before he left Pakistan. (GE 2; Tr. 41-61) 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant possessed a Pakistani passport that was valid from 2005 until it expired 
in 2010. In March 2012, Applicant renewed it so that he could travel to Afghanistan to 
work for the U.S. military. It was valid until September 2013. When Applicant completed 
 
4 
 
 
his security clearance application in March 2012, he possessed the Pakistani passport. 
(Answer; GE 1-3; Tr. 61-65) 
 
In April 2013, Applicant returned to the United States from Afghanistan for his 
U.S. naturalization ceremony. He also obtained his U.S. passport. He submitted an 
affidavit showing that after he returned to Afghanistan, he surrendered his Pakistani 
passport to his facility security officer (FSO) on May 1, 2013, and it was destroyed. 
Applicant signed a notarized document officially renouncing his Pakistani citizenship on 
the same day. He has not been in Pakistan since 2007. He plans to buy a home in the 
United States, and earn a college degree. He has no intention to return to Pakistan 
because, “I have nothing there to go to . . . . Everything I have is here.” (Answer; GE 3; 
Tr. 61-65) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant provided references regarding his work performance and character. A 
lieutenant colonel who worked with Applicant in Afghanistan called him the “go-to 
linguist” whose knowledge, professionalism, and competence made him “absolutely 
invaluable.” He stated that Applicant “was always there, side by side with us on many 
dangerous missions, and to this day, I trust him with my life and those of my soldiers. He 
continually put himself at risk, volunteering for all the toughest missions alongside 
Afghan and American Soldiers, to make sure that we accomplished out mission.” (AE C) 
 
 A captain who worked with Applicant stated that he was trusted with sensitive 
mission and operational information and “always placed the interests of the US 
Government, the United States Army, and our team above his own and all other 
countries.” A first lieutenant who was the linguist manager in Afghanistan said that the 
team relied heavily on Applicant “due to his high level of commitment to our missions and 
his extremely high level of reliability” and that Applicant was always the chosen translator 
for high-level meetings. A captain with three combat deployments evaluated Applicant as 
“the finest linguist I have ever worked with.” He noted Applicant “. . . risked his life by 
going out on several missions . . . and operated well outside the normal range of 
responsibility for a linguist.” The captain stated, “He is a brother just as any of the 
Soldiers I have served with.” (AE A, C) 
 
The Islamist Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It held successful 
elections in February 2008 and has a coalition government. However, terrorist networks 
operate within Pakistan. Members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) region, in Balochistan Province, and in the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa in the FATA region. The FATA region is a sanctuary to al-Qaida and other 
extremist groups. The Haqqani Network also operates with impunity in Pakistan. On 
September 7, 2012, the United States formally declared the Haqqani Network a foreign 
terrorist organization.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The Department of State (DOS) defines terrorist safe havens as “ungoverned, 
under-governed, or ill-governed physical areas where terrorists are able to organize, 
plan, raise funds, communicate, recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative security 
because of inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both.”3 The DOS concludes 
that, despite efforts by Pakistani security forces, groups including Afghan and Pakistani 
militants and al-Qaida terrorists have safe haven in Pakistan, and train and operate 
there to plan attacks against the United States and its allies in Afghanistan. In 2011, 
U.S. special forces personnel found and killed al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden in 
Pakistan.  
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported violations 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, honor crimes, wide-spread corruption, 
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in persons. The 
DOS notes that Pakistani domestic intelligence services monitored political activists, 
suspected terrorists, and the media. Credible reports indicate that authorities routinely 
used wiretaps, and intercepted and opened mail without requisite court approval. 
 
 The United States is working with Pakistan to strengthen their relationship 
because it is vital to regional and international security. In January 2014, Secretary of 
State Kerry noted that, since the country’s elections in 2012, ties between the two 
countries have strengthened on a broad range of issues, including security.  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
                                                          
3 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2012, Chapter 5, Terrorist Safe Havens. (HE II) 
 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
6 
 
 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the 
national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are relevant:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
                                                          
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country, per se, do not disqualify 
an applicant from obtaining a security clearance; such ties are only disqualifying if they 
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential conflict of interest. 
Applicant's grandfather, uncle, and cousins are citizens and residents of Pakistan. The 
country in question must be considered.8 Although the United States and Pakistan are 
working to strengthen their relationship, terrorist networks operate in Pakistan against 
United States interests and terrorists find safe haven there. The country has a poor 
human rights record. Several of Applicant's foreign relatives are members of the 
Pakistani military. Applicant's foreign relatives create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7 (a) and (b) apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Although Pakistan represents a heightened risk of exploitation, Applicant has not 
lived there for seven years. He has not been in touch with his foreign family members in 
the past six to eight years. Although his grandfather was a government employee, 
Applicant had a distant relationship to him when Applicant lived in Pakistan, and he has 
not spoken to his grandfather since he moved to the United States seven years ago. He 
has little to no relationship to his foreign uncle and cousins, because his family and 
theirs broke off contact in 2008. Given the infrequent contact between Applicant and his 
foreign family, and their unfriendly relationship, it is unlikely he would be placed in a 
position of having to choose between foreign and U.S. interests, or be at risk of foreign 
influence of exploitation. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply. 
 
Applicant has worked in dangerous, high-risk situations since 2012, in support of 
U.S. forces. He served the United States by placing himself in harm’s way in a combat 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (App. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
8 
 
 
zone. His performance has been exemplary, according to the officers’ letters in his 
support. In contrast to his tenuous ties to extended family in Pakistan, his family and 
friends in the United States, with whom he is frequently in contact, are not only citizens 
and residents but many also serve the U.S. government in their employment. Because of 
these U.S. ties, and Applicant's demonstrated commitment to United States interests, it 
is unlikely that he would face a conflict of interest between his loyalty to the United 
States and Pakistan. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern under Guideline C, AG ¶ 9, states: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
Applicant possessed a valid foreign passport. He used it to travel to Afghanistan 
in 2012, to travel from Afghanistan to the United States later that year, and to travel 
from Afghanistan to the United States for his U.S. citizenship ceremony in 2013. He 
possessed the foreign passport until May 2013. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 11 contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions, especially the following: 
 
 (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant used his foreign passport for travel in 2012 and 2013, but his trips 
occurred before he became a U.S. citizen in April 2013. On May 1, 2013, Applicant 
surrendered his Pakistani passport to his FSO. He provided a notarized statement that 
he agreed to the destruction of the passport. Applicant also provided copies of 
documentation indicating he officially renounced his Pakistani citizenship. His 
documented actions indicate that he was not only willing, but in fact did, renounce his 
foreign citizenship. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) apply. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant has little connection to Pakistan. He left as a teenager, has not been 
there in seven years, and has no plans to return. He has no property or funds there. His 
ties to remaining extended family members in Pakistan are tenuous. In contrast, he has 
strong ties to the United States. His parents and siblings are U.S. citizens. His father 
works for the U.S. government as a linguist. The greater part of Applicant's extended 
family—40 to 50 members—left Pakistan in the 1970s and are citizen-residents of the 
United States. Many members of Applicant's circle of family and friends are not only 
citizens and residents of the United States, but serve the U.S. government as linguists, 
federal contractors, or cultural advisors. He has substantial funds in the United States. 
He demonstrated his preference for the United States when he surrendered his foreign 
passport for destruction and formally renounced his foreign citizenship.  
 
Moreover, Applicant served U.S. interests in a combat zone, and his character 
references establish his significant contributions to U.S. national security. According to 
Appeal Board jurisprudence, a judge need not assign significant weight to an applicant's 
past conformity with security procedures or regulations to mitigate more immediate 
disqualifying circumstances. The Appeal Board has held:9 
 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006). 
 
10 
 
 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the national security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. 
Bd. July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant's assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power's attempts at coercion or 
exploitation. 
 
Given the record evidence that Applicant has only tenuous relations with his foreign 
family, and that he has placed himself in harm’s way to support the interests of the 
United States over his own, I find the security concerns regarding foreign influence and 
foreign preference are mitigated.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the cited security 
concern. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts raised.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
