 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-22295 
                                                             )                                                                                         
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, Guideline K, Handling Protected Information, and Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant signed his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on August 20, 2004. 
On that date, he also signed a release, which he then countersigned on June 29, 2006.  
On November 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On December 29, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA served Applicant with an undated  
and amended SOR, which, in addition to the previously alleged Guideline F security 
concerns, also contained one allegation of disqualifying conduct under Guideline K, 
Handling Protected Information, and one allegation under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Applicant answered the amended SOR on June 22, 2008 and July 30, 2008.  
The case was assigned to me on September 16, 2008.  I set a hearing for October 6, 
2008, which was continued, for good cause shown, at the request of Applicant’s 
counsel. I convened a hearing on December 3, 2008 to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced nine exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 9 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and called one witness. He introduced 62 exhibits, which were 
identified and marked as follows: Ex. A (Answer to SOR); Ex. B (Answer to SOR); Ex. C 
(Answer to SOR) Ex. D (Answer to SOR); Ex. E (Answer to SOR); Ex. A (Answer to 
Amended SOR); Ex. B (Answer to Amended SOR); Ex. C (Answer to Amended SOR); 
Ex. A, 1 through 37; Ex. B, 1 and 2; Ex. C, 1 through 10, Ex. D, 1 and 2; and Ex. E, 1 
through 3. Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without objection.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
December 15, 2008, so that Applicant could provide additional information for the 
record. Applicant timely filed six additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not object 
to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. I marked the post-hearing submissions as Ex. 
F through K, and they were admitted to the record. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of 
the hearing on December 11, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR contains 13 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations, one allegation under AG K, Handling Protected Information, 
and one allegation under AG E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant admitted three allegations 
under AG F (¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, and 1.m).  He denied the remaining AG F allegations (¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i. 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l). He admitted the AG K allegation (¶ 2.a) and 
the AG E allegation (¶ 3.a). Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. 
(Answer to SOR; Answer to Amended SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 49 years old and a college graduate. He has been married to his wife 
for 24 years.  In 1984, the same year he and his wife were married, Applicant enlisted in 
the military. He served in the U.S. military until 2004, when he retired honorably.  
Applicant has held a security clearance for more than 20 years. (Ex. 1; Tr. 83, 91-93, 
128.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife are the parents of two children, ages 20 and 16.  
Applicant’s second child, a son, was born prematurely and has experienced 
 
3 
 
 
developmental delays and difficulties.  About one year after the birth of their son in 
1992, Applicant’s wife gave birth to an infant daughter, who was stillborn.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 48-
51, 65-66.) 
 
 During his Navy career, Applicant served as a radioman. When he was deployed, 
his wife was responsible for paying bills and managing the family’s finances. Applicant’s 
son had poor health as a young child, requiring his wife’s full-time attention.  During this 
time, she was unable to carry out full-time work outside the home.  (Tr. 59-60, 92.) 
 
 In 2001, Applicant was stationed in a Middle Eastern country, where he served 
until 2003. His family was scheduled to accompany him to this duty station.  Applicant 
acquired a rental property for himself and his family.  However, Applicant’s son was not 
medically screened to reside abroad because of his health issues. As a result, 
Applicant’s wife and children remained in the United States while he was stationed 
overseas, and Applicant maintained two households for a period of time. (Tr. 57-59, 68.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife sometimes had difficulty managing the family’s finances.  
Sometimes, she fell behind in paying debts. When Applicant and his wife sought 
financial counseling, a financial counselor advised them to use their resources to pay 
current debts because old debts, if unpaid, would eventually fall off their credit report 
and would no longer be a cause for concern. They followed this advice. (Tr. 60-61, 127-
128.)  
 
 Since his retirement from the Navy in 2004, Applicant has been employed by a 
federal contractor. His wife has also worked full time since 2004. Their combined net 
monthly incomes, including Applicant’s military retirement pay, total $7,747.  Their fixed 
monthly expenses total $4,389. Their monthly net remainder totals $3,253.  (Tr. 74; 154-
158; Ex. H; Ex. I; Ex. J.)   
 
 In his current civilian employment, Applicant works in secure guarded building.  
He works in a secure office and must present a badge to enter the office. He is also 
cleared to enter and work in other secured areas and must use a special code to access 
his assigned secure computer, which has a classified removable hard drive.  He is 
required to remove the hard drive at the end of the work day for storage in a secure 
area. Each day, when the office is closed for the night, the last person to leave the 
premises is charged with preparing a checklist certifying that all classified materials are 
appropriately secured. (Tr. 129-132.) 
 
 In March 2008, when Applicant left his office for the day, he did not remove his 
classified hard drive from his computer and secure it as required. The individual 
charged with the final security check of the office did not notice that Applicant’s 
classified hard drive had not been removed and stored appropriately. It was not until the 
next day that it was discovered that Applicant’s classified hard drive had not been 
secured according to office policies.  (Tr. 132-135.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s failure to properly secure the classified hard drive was reported to 
responsible authorities, and he was suspended for one week without pay.  This was 
Applicant’s first security infraction. The policy of Applicant’s employer policies was to 
issue a letter of warning for first-time security infractions and to counsel the employee. 
After an internal investigation, it was determined that “the likelihood of a compromise of 
National Security Information was not a threat.” (Tr. 135-136; Ex. 9; Ex. D-1; Ex. D-2.) 
 
 The amended SOR alleged under Guideline K that Applicant’s failure to secure 
the classified hard drive violated paragraphs 5-100, 5-300, 5-302 and/or 5-303 of DoD 
5220.22M, National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual, February 28, 2006 
(“NISPOM”).  The amended SOR also alleged that Applicant’s failure to secure the 
classified hard drive also raised security concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and willingness to comply with rules and regulations under Guideline E.  (Amended 
SOR ¶ 2.a; Amended SOR ¶ 3.a.)      
 
 The amended SOR also alleged Applicant was responsible for 13 financial 
delinquencies. At his hearing and in post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided 
documentation to corroborate his statements that he had satisfied the debts alleged at 
amended SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.j, and 1.l. (Tr. 113-117, 122-124 144-145, 
Amended SOR Ex. A; Ex. C-5; Ex. C-6, Ex.3; Ex. G; Ex. F-2; Ex. F-8.) 
 
 Applicant provided documentation to corroborate his statements that he was 
meeting payment plans for debts alleged at amended SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m. 
(Tr. 118-121, 125-126, 147-152; Ex. C-7; Ex. F-2; Ex. C-8, C-9.) 
 
 Applicant also provided documentation showing he had written to the three 
national credit bureaus and formally disputed the debts alleged at amended SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.f. In his letter to the credit bureaus, he also requested their assistance in locating 
the creditors identified at amended SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.k so that he could contact them to 
determine the amount of his indebtedness. Applicant expressed a willingness to fully 
satisfy all of his debts.  (Tr. 114-115, 119-122, 124-127, 145-146, 150-151; Ex. F at 1-
2.)    
 
 Several of Applicant’s co-workers provided letters of character reference on his 
behalf.  They praised him as diligent, responsible, and a hard worker. They identified 
him as productive, dedicated to the mission of his office, and the “go-to-person” sought 
out by co-workers and customers for his expertise.  (Ex. E-1; Ex. E-2; Ex. E-3.)  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties that spanned a period of 
several years when Applicant was in the military and stationed unaccompanied 
overseas.  Applicant and his wife have been steadily employed since he retired from the 
military in 2004. Their annual income, including his military pension, is approximately 
$93,000. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation to corroborate that he had paid, settled, or  
established active payment plans for nine of the debts alleged in the amended SOR. He 
also provided documentation to show he had written to the three national credit bureaus 
to dispute the legitimacy of two debts alleged on the amended SOR and to request 
assistance in identifying two other creditors so that he could contact them regarding 
payment.    
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Applicant and his wife sought financial counseling. Unfortunately, the financial 
counselors advised them to ignore their old debt, advice which caused their financial 
delinquencies to remain a security concern. At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that 
this had been bad advice. He admitted his financial delinquencies, and it was clear that 
he understood his financial problems and had taken active steps to resolve them. I 
conclude that all of the Financial Consideration mitigating conditions apply to the facts 
of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶33 describes the Guideline K security concern as follows: “Deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other 
sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, 
reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such information. . . .” 
 
 Applicant’s failure to remove his classified hard drive from his computer and to 
secure it properly raises surety concerns under AG ¶¶ 34 (b) and 34 (g).1   
 
 One Guideline K mitigating condition might be applicable to the facts of 
Applicant’s case.  AG ¶ 35(a) reads as follows: “so much time has elapsed since the 
behavior, or it happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
 Applicant’s security infraction occurred in March 2008, and it is therefore recent.  
However, the record reflects that prior to Applicant’s action in March 2008, he had held 
a security clearance for over 20 years without incident.  Applicant’s co-workers noted he 
was careful and diligent. His action did not result in the compromise of classified 
information.  It was a one-time event and, when viewed in light of Applicant’s reputation 
for care and diligence, is unlikely to recur.  Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 35(a) 
applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 The amended SOR concluded that Appellant’s personal conduct related to his 
failure to properly secure his classified hard drive at the end of the work day raised 
doubts about his judgment, reliability, and ability to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.  Under the Personal Conduct guideline “[c]onduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.”  AG ¶15. 
 
 
1 AG ¶ 34(b) reads: “collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or in any other 
unauthorized location.”  AG ¶ 34(g) reads: “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified 
or other sensitive information.”  
 
8 
 
 
  I have considered all of the Personal Conduct disqualifying conditions.  
Appellant was entrusted with a security clearance, which his employer relied upon in 
employing him. He was responsible for following his employer’s and the NISPOM’s 
policies for protecting classified information. I conclude that his failure to properly secure 
his classified hard drive raises a security concern under AG ¶ 15. 
   
  Appellant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  AG ¶17(c).   
 
  Applicant’s action in failing to properly secure his classified hard drive was not 
minor, and it was a recent act. However, it was his first and only security infraction in 
over 20 years of holding a security clearance. An investigation concluded that no 
compromise of national security information had occurred as a result of his infraction. 
He had a reputation in his office among his co-workers as diligent and responsible. It 
does not appear that this behavior is likely to recur.  Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 
17(c)  applies to the facts of Appellant’s case.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 49 
years. His financial problems began when he was a younger man serving in the military 
and frequently deployed. In his absence, his wife was responsible for handling the 
family’s finances. She sometimes found it difficult to timely pay their creditors.  Since 
2004, both Applicant and his wife are employed full-time. Their annual family income is 
 
9 
 
 
over $90,000 a year, and there appear to be no impediments to prevent them from 
timely meeting all of their financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has shown good faith in contacting his creditors and paying or settling 
his delinquent accounts. He has contacted the three national credit bureaus to dispute 
two accounts and to obtain additional information about two others. He is currently living 
within his means and paying attention to his financial obligations. 
 
I observed Applicant carefully at his security clearance hearing.  I found him to be 
a serious and responsible person. I believe it is highly unlikely that in the future he will 
fail to carry out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with a security 
clearance and the protection of classified information. I conclude that he is not a 
security risk at this time. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Guideline 
K, and Guideline E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                      FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.m:          For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:            FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:                      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:            FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:                      For Applicant 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it  is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
