 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 10-07256 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to continue a security clearance required for a 
position with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant 
interrogatories to clarify information in his background. After reviewing the results of the 
background investigation and Applicant's responses to the interrogatories, DOD could 
not make the affirmative findings required to continue his security clearance. DOD 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated December 13, 2012, detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 20, 2013, admitting the allegations 
with explanations. He did not request a hearing. He submitted a timely request for a 
hearing on April 11, 2013. (Hearing Exhibit I) Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on June 5, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on June 6, 2013. DOD 
issued a Notice of Hearing on July 15, 2013, scheduling a hearing for August 7, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered eight exhibits that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. 
Ex.) 1 through 8. Applicant testified, and offered three exhibits that I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibit (App. Ex.) A through C. I 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 14, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
  
Applicant is 56 years old. He served 21 years on active duty, from August 1979 
until 2000, in the Army as an Apache helicopter pilot. He has been married for 33 years 
and has four adopted sons. In addition, his mother-in-law has recently moved into his 
household. He recently received a Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree. 
After retiring from the Army in 2000, he worked for two different defense contractors for 
about seven years. He was terminated in 2007 by the second defense contractor when 
the company decided to concentrate on civilian rather than military business. He formed 
his own consulting company in 2007, but he had to close it after only a few months 
because of a lack of business. He has been employed by his present employer for 
approximately four years. His annual salary is now approximately $145,000. He also 
has annual military retired pay of approximately $40,000. Applicant has held a security 
clearance for over 34 years. He was cleared for access to top secret classified 
information in 2007. (Tr. 23-24, 46-47, 49-55) 
 
When Applicant formed his own company in 2007, he used his 401k account and 
his personal savings to start the company. He had recruited some clients before he 
formed the company. Shortly after forming the company, there was an economic 
downturn in the country and he lost a lot of the clients he had previously cultivated. One 
of his clients offered him employment in 2007, so he could have benefits for him and his 
family. He was unemployed for about three months before starting employment in 
approximately 2009 for his present employer. (Tr. 23-24, 49-54) 
 
Applicant’s financial challenges started in 2007. His annual income went from 
$211,000 in 2004 to about $185,000 today. However, his annual income was in the 
$40,000 category for most of the period from 2007 until 2009. In over 75 months, his 
income was off $392,000 from what he would have had at his highest earning level. His 
 
3 
 
current financial situation shows a monthly income of $11,499, monthly expenses of 
$9,937, with a monthly remainder of $1,562. However, there may be expenses that 
have not been included in this tabulation. Applicant’s present job pays well but is in a 
state other than where his family lives. The travel expenses and maintaining two 
households are additional expenses. (Tr. 19-23, 32-34, 46-47; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated 
April 9, 2010; App. Ex. B, Briefing Slides, dated August 8, 2013) 
 
Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 4, dated April 30, 2010; Gov. Ex. 5, dated December 7, 
2011, and Gov. Ex. 6, dated November 12, 2012), Applicant’s admissions (Response to 
SOR, dated February 20, 2013), and his responses to interrogatories (Gov. Ex. 2, and 
3, dated March 28, 2012) establish the following delinquent debts or financial issues for 
Applicant: a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in October 2011 and dismissed in November 
2011 (SOR 1.a); a judgment for a bank on a home equity loan of $24,591 (SOR 1.b), a 
debt to a medical provider in collection for $87 (SOR 1.c); a debt on a mortgage loan 
from a bank that has been foreclosed for $422,000 (SOR 1.d); and a debt to the Internal 
Revenue Service for taxes owed for 2010 of $1,645.31 (SOR 1.e).  
 
Applicant presented sufficient information to show that he paid the $87 medical 
debt at SOR 1.c in 2012. (Tr. 72; See Response to SOR, dated February 20, 2013) He 
presented sufficient information to establish he paid the 2010 IRS debt at SOR 1.e in 
2012. (Tr. 72; See Gov. Ex. 8, Check, dated April 26, 2012). Applicant owed taxes 
because he did not make any mortgage interest payments in 2010. He also noted that 
he owed about $7,500 in taxes for 2011 for the same reason. This debt is not included 
in the SOR. He has an agreed payment plan with the IRS of $500 monthly on the 2011 
tax debt. (Tr. 88-90) The remaining SOR allegations (SOR 1.b, and 1d) pertain to 
mortgage and home equity loans with two banks. 
 
Applicant used credit cards to maintain his life style during periods of low income 
or unemployment. He had credit card debt of approximately $45,000. Applicant learned 
from an attorney or financial adviser that his life insurance policies had a cash surrender 
value. He turned in the insurance policies for the cash surrender value and changed 
them to term insurance. He used the significant proceeds from the insurance policies to 
pay in full all but one of his credit card debts. He now has only one credit card debt 
remaining, a Discover card, with a balance of about $2,300. He is paying Discover $163 
each month on the debt. He anticipates having the debt paid in full by the end of 2014. 
He and his wife no longer use credit cards. He also has approximately $60,000 in 
student loans for his education that he is paying at $350 monthly for approximately two 
years. He is current with these payments. (Tr. 33-34, 60-61, 73-75, 88-89) 
 
Applicant retired from the Army in 2000 and purchased a home in 2002. He and 
his family still live in that house. His initial mortgage was for $420,000 with monthly 
payments of $3,100. By 2005, the mortgage principal was down to approximately 
$380,000. He refinanced the house in 2005, taking some money from the equity to 
make improvements. The mortgage was again back at $420,000. His income was 
sufficient in 2005 to permit him to make his mortgage payments. (Tr. 47-49) 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s mortgage was initially with a mortgage company that was dissolved 
during the housing crisis in 2007. By that time, Applicant was having difficulty making 
his monthly mortgage payments because of his reduced income. He worked with the 
mortgage company’s hardship division to restructure the mortgage, but they were 
unable to reach an agreement. The original mortgage company was purchased by a 
major national bank during the housing crisis, and Applicant started working with the 
hardship division of the bank. He was actively engaged with the financial institutions to 
mitigate or resolve the financial issues of his mortgage. He was told by the bank that 
even if he modified the mortgage and made payments, it might not prevent a 
foreclosure. After he started working for his present employer in October 2009, he 
attempted to make payments to the bank on the mortgage. But the bank refused to 
accept the payments since they had made a decision to foreclose on the mortgage loan. 
Applicant wrote letters to a senior bank executive concerning his account and their 
management of mortgages. Applicant determined that there was no desire by the bank 
at the time to resolve the debt. Applicant was in constant communication with the bank 
concerning a reinstatement of his mortgage. Since the bank refused to accept his 
payments or stop the foreclosure, Applicant decided it was best for him to not make any 
additional payments. Applicant’s last attempt to make a mortgage payment was in 
January 2010. (Tr. 26-27, 56-59; See, Gov. Ex. 3, Applicant’s Bank Correspondence) 
 
The bank started many foreclosure actions after Applicant did not pay his 
mortgage. Applicant hired attorneys and was able to stop the foreclosures and continue 
with attempts at modification of the loan. In 2010, the bank again refused to modify his 
mortgage because his monthly salary was too much for such a modification. The bank 
did offer to modify the mortgage if Applicant made a $52,000 payment to bring the debt 
current. Applicant did not have the funds to make such a payment. The bank continued 
to initiate foreclosures but Applicant was able to stop most of these foreclosure actions. 
(Gov. Ex. 3, Trustee Sale notification, at 94-106) As the bank was ready to foreclose in 
October 2011, at the advice and guidance of his attorney, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, as listed at SOR 1.a, to stop the foreclosure. He was successful in stopping 
the foreclosure so he dismissed the Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2011. (Tr. 29-
30, 70-71; Gov. Ex. 3, Bankruptcy documents at 79-93) 
 
Applicant submitted his latest attempt to modify the mortgage on July 1, 2013. He 
submitted a Request for Mortgage Assistance (RMA) under the Making Home 
Affordable Program. He listed on the RMA his present gross monthly income of 
$11,442, with monthly expense of $9,937.29. This income is about 12% less than the 
highest income he made when he was paying his mortgage. Applicant testified that just 
before the hearing he was advised that his request had been denied since his income 
was very high and he could not pay the arrears in a lump sum and bring the mortgage 
current. (Tr. 64-70; App. Ex. C, Request for Mortgage Assistance, dated July 1, 2013) 
Even though Applicant has not made a mortgage payment since January 2010, 
he has not put funds aside for mortgage payments. He stated he used his income to 
cover normal expenses, take care of his family, and pay down some other debts. He 
was also concerned that if he had a large saving fund it would negatively impact his 
 
5 
 
negotiations with the bank. He has pointed out to the bank that he has paid over 
$330,000 towards his loan since he moved into the house over 11 years ago. He has 
chosen to stay in the house as long as he can with the hope that the bank will negotiate 
a modification with him. (Tr. 66-69, 91-92) 
 
Applicant hired a number of attorneys and financial advisers during the entire 
process of dealing with the bank on his mortgage loan. They assisted him by providing 
advice, negotiating with the bank, and filing the bankruptcy. He paid significant legal 
bills. In addition, he gained financial insight while studying for the MBA degree. (Tr. 29-
30, 57-58, 62-63, and 74-75) 
 
Applicant believes the value of the house after the housing market slump is only 
$350,000. The house is “under water” by approximately $100,000, considering the 
original mortgage and the home equity mortgage. He has not made any payments on 
the primary mortgage since approximately 2009. He recently made payments on the 
home equity loan. (Tr. 94-101) 
 
Applicant has also been negotiating with the bank that held his home equity debt 
of approximately $25,000 as noted at SOR 1.b. The bank turned the debt over to a 
collection agency. The collection agency cited him for a default judgment. Applicant 
hired an attorney and opened discussions with the collection agency, but no agreement 
was reached. Since there was no agreement with the bank, Applicant started working 
directly with the collection agency. He decided to see if the collection agency would 
accept a payment on the debt. He sent the collection agency a good-faith payment of 
$350 in July 2013, the amount previously agreed to by the bank. The collection agency 
has now accepted two payments. He plans to continue to make payments by automatic 
transfer from his bank account. (Tr. 36-38, 75-81; Gov. Ex. 7, Letter from Collection 
Agency, dated February 20, 2013)  
 
Applicant’s plan is to continue to work with the bank and the collection agency to 
reach a settlement on the mortgage loan and the home equity loan. He will continue to 
send the collection agency $350 monthly. He has a payment schedule for his student 
loans which is current. He has stable employment and he foresees having a stable 
income. (Tr. 39-40) 
 
Applicant’s debt load is high. A review of his finances shows that he is now 
making almost as much as his highest previous income when he was making mortgage 
payments. His latest offer to the bank was to make mortgage payments of only between 
$1,500 and $2,000 monthly. The original mortgage payments were about $3,100. He is 
in arrears on the mortgage and believes the bank wants monthly mortgage payments of 
approximately $3,500. Applicant claims that he cannot offer to make this larger payment 
required by the bank. However, a review of his household expenses and his monthly 
bank debit statements show many expenses that indicate a frivolous lifestyle that can 
be cut or restructured to accommodate a higher mortgage payment. For example, there 
are significant expenses for maintaining horses on the property, and expenses for 
 
6 
 
eating out and store purchases. Applicant appears to be able to maintain a good 
lifestyle because he is not making a mortgage payment. Applicant has not shown any 
effort to change his lifestyle to have funds to make a mortgage payment. His income is 
almost at the level of his highest income year yet he considers his income as not 
adequate to make a sufficient mortgage payment. His lifestyle expenses have not been 
changed to accommodate the needs of his mortgage. Applicant spent most of his efforts 
fighting the bank for a mortgage payment he feels is adequate and not looking at his 
expenses so he could meet his mortgage financial obligation. Even without a mortgage 
payment, his monthly expenditures indicate he is very close to living beyond his means. 
(Tr. 89-92; Gov. Ex. 3, Response to Interrogatories, dated, March 28, 2012, at 107-129; 
App. Ex. B, Briefing Slides, dated August 8, 2013, at 4) 
 
Applicant presented letters of support from his employers. The corporate vice-
president for business development and strategy stated that Applicant is a valued 
employee of the company and the business development team. He always exhibited 
outstanding personal character. He does not see any risk to the company or the 
Government from Applicant’s financial issues. He recommends that Applicant be 
granted eligibility for access to classified information. (App. Ex. A1, Letter, dated August 
6, 2013) 
 
Another company vice-president wrote that Applicant exhibits outstanding 
personal character. He has performed his duties with utmost integrity and awareness of 
security concerns. Any claims that Applicant may be a security risk is unfounded. He 
recommends that he continue to be granted eligibility for access to classified 
information. (App. Ex. A2, letter, dated August 6, 2013) 
 
Another company vice-president wrote that he has worked closely with Applicant 
for over two years. Applicant is a model to emulate when it comes to managing 
classified information. He has never taken any action that raises the slightest concern 
about his strength of character or his ability to protect classified information. He 
recommends Applicant be granted eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
7 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s self-responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. A 
security clearance adjudication is based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 
8 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk and inconsistent with 
the holding of a security clearance. Applicants are not required to be debt free, but are 
required to manage their finances in such a way as to meet their financial obligations. 
 
Credit reports and Applicant’s admissions show delinquent debts for a mortgage, 
a home equity loan, for federal income taxes, and a medical debt. Also a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy filed and dismissed is listed as a security concern. Applicant admits the 
delinquent debts and the bankruptcy, raising Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations). The evidence shows a history of both an 
inability and an unwillingness to satisfy the debt.  
 
I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions 
that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). 
These mitigating conditions applied when Applicant first started having financial 
problems in 2007. Applicant incurred the delinquent debts when he lost employment in 
the economic downturn around 2007, and he did not have sufficient income to meet his 
financial obligations, particularly his mortgage. He initially acted responsibly. He cashed 
in his insurance policies, using the proceeds to pay almost all of his credit card debts. 
All of the SOR debts, except his mortgage and home equity loan, have been paid. He 
reached agreement on a payment plan on his home equity debt, and he is current with 
the agreed payments. He has made extensive attempts to negotiate a loan modification 
with the bank holding his mortgage loan. The conditions that caused the collapse were 
beyond his control, are unusual, and are unlikely to recur. Applicant acted reasonably 
and responsibly in attempting to resolve the debt with the bank. However, his present 
attitude towards resolving the debt shows irresponsible behavior and poor judgment.  
 
Even though Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, 
due to circumstances outside his control, it must be determined if Applicant has since 
acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with his financial difficulties. (See ISCR 
Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999) at 4; and ISCR Case No. 03-13096 
(App. Bd. November 29, 2005) at 4) Applicant now has an income that is close to the 
income from his best income year when he was paying a mortgage. The amount of 
mortgage payment he has offered is low in comparison to his income. The bank has 
rejected his offer of a mortgage payment because the amount is not consistent with his 
high income. He stated he does not have the ability or funds to make a larger mortgage 
payment. However, he continues to use his income to maintain a lifestyle that he and 
 
9 
 
his family embraced because he was not paying a mortgage. He has not presented any 
information to show a change or a willingness to change the management of his 
finances to accommodate a mortgage payment in line with his income. He is not now 
acting reasonably and responsibly to pay his mortgage loan debt.  
 
I also considered Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 20(c) (the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control). Applicant hired many 
lawyers and paid a lot of fees for them to advice and work for him in his attempts to stop 
foreclosures and negotiate with the bank. He also received excellent financial advice 
from a financial planner who suggested that Appellant use the cash surrender value of 
his life insurance policies to pay his credit card debts. He also gained financial 
knowledge while studying for his MBA degree. What is missing is a clear indication that 
the problem is being resolved or is under control.  
 
I also considered AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For AG ¶ 20(d) to apply, there 
must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-
faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, and honesty adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of 
handling debts is needed. Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt 
payment. A "meaningful track record" of debt payment can be established by evidence 
of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. 
 
Applicant initially demonstrated good faith in paying and resolving a significant 
number of his delinquent debts. He has debts that he is currently paying as agreed. 
However, he has not continued to act in good faith in trying to resolve his mortgage loan 
debt. He spent the majority of his efforts, and a lot of his resources to fight the mortgage 
lending bank to get a loan modification on his terms only. He and his family want to 
maintain the good lifestyle that they have become accustomed to since Applicant has 
not made a mortgage payments since January 2010. Since October 2009, Applicant 
has received a good high income, almost as much as he made in his best income year. 
He used that income to keep his good lifestyle and not meet his mortgage financial 
obligations. Acting in good faith means Applicant should be willing to make a monthly 
mortgage payment from his high income that matches what financial advisers and 
experts believe is reasonable and comfortable for a house payment. The bank rejected 
his mortgage modification application because his income is too high for the amount he 
is offering to pay on his mortgage loan. He believes his lifestyle requirements for him 
and his family prevented him from meeting his mortgage financial obligations. Applicant 
has not established that his offers on his mortgage are reasonable, prudent, and an 
honest adherence to his financial duty and obligation. He has not established his good-
faith intent or shown a “meaningful track record” of debt payment on his mortgage.  
 
Applicant’s present management of his finances and his failure to pay his 
mortgage is a prime example of the financial consideration security concern. He has 
 
10 
 
shown a failure or inability to live within his means, satisfy debt, and meet his financial 
obligation. His present financial management reflects unfavorably on his 
trustworthiness, honesty, and good judgment. Based on all of the financial information 
available, I conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate security concerns based on 
financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is a 
retired Army officer who devoted over 21 years of his life to serve as a helicopter pilot 
on active duty. I considered that he successfully held a security clearance for over 34 
years and there is no evidence of a security violation. I also considered that Applicant 
was in a good financial position until the housing and economic crisis developed in 
about 2007. He lost his job, his income was drastically reduced, and he struggled to 
meet his financial obligations. He did many good things concerning his finances under 
these circumstances. He paid most of his debts and he continues to pay some of them. 
He attempted to negotiate a mortgage settlement with his mortgage lender.  
 
However, he has not continued to act reasonably and responsibly towards his 
finances. He now has excellent income that is very close to the income he received 
when he was meeting his financial obligations. He has not made a mortgage payment 
since January 2010, but he continued to maintain a lifestyle for him and his family that 
they like. This is like wanting his cake, eating it too, and not paying for the cake. He and 
his family want to continue living in the house they have lived in for over 11 years 
without paying for it or even making a payment that is as reasonable as a rent payment. 
He has not shown a desire to lower his lifestyle cost so he can devote more of his 
 
11 
 
income to a reasonable and responsible mortgage payment. Applicant’s management of 
his finances is unreasonable, irresponsible, and not a prudent adherence to his financial 
obligations. In sum, Applicant is not now taking reasonable action to resolve the debt 
and maintain his financial responsibility. His present financial track record does not 
provide confidence that he will continue to resolve the debt and be ready to make 
mortgage payments. His present irresponsible management of his financial obligations 
indicates he will not be concerned or act responsibly in regard to classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
