 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09056 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline M, use of 
information technology systems, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The Government 
failed to establish a disqualifying condition under Guideline D, sexual behavior, by 
substantial evidence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2013, the Department of Defense Office (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline M, use of 
information technology systems; Guideline D, sexual behavior; and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2013. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 27, 2013, 
with a hearing date of July 9, 2013. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked and accepted as hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits or witnesses. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 16, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he essentially denied all the allegations listed 
in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is single, never married, and has no children. He 
has a high school diploma and has taken some college courses. He currently works for 
a defense contractor as a systems administrator. He began working for his current 
employer in January 2011. He retired from the Marine Corps as a master sergeant (pay 
grade E-8) in May 2010. He currently holds a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct alleged in the SOR includes: (1) accessing wireless 
networks, without authorization, from 2006 to 2009, and taking a hard drive from work, 
without authorization, for personal use (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 3.a-3.b); (2) engaging in 
voyeurism (SOR ¶ 2.a); and, (3) providing false information on his February 2011 
security clearance application by failing to list his unauthorized accessing of wireless 
networks in 2006 to 2009, and by providing false information when responding to 
Government interrogatories in November 2012 by failing to disclose his unauthorized 
accessing of wireless accounts and viewing of private accounts (SOR ¶¶ 3.c-3.d).  
  
 In 2008, while still on active duty in the Marine Corps, Applicant’s duties included 
repairing laptop computers. When work requirements demanded it, he took some of the 
laptop computers to his home to work on them. He did this on three to four occasions. 
All the laptops were unclassified and none contained classified software or information. 
In attempting to repair the computers he would replace the hard drives with his own 
personal hard drives so that he could get the machines working as quickly as possible. 
His supervisors acquiesced to his actions by letting him know that they wanted the 
computers fixed quickly. He was never disciplined or counseled for his action in taking 
the computers home and replacing the hard drives. He denied the version of events 
concerning this incident listed in an investigative report prepared by another 
government agency (AGA).2 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-8, 27; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 29, 33-35, 45-46; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted to watching adult pornography on occasion in the past. He 
also stated that during an interview with AGA, when asked about voyeurism, he was 
referring to watching adult pornography. There is no evidence to suggest he watched 
adult pornography using government resources. He has not participated in watching live 
sex acts.3 
 
 Between 2006 and 2009, Applicant accessed the wireless networks of others on 
several occasions. On some occasions he connected to these networks through no 
affirmative action on his part. By default his computer would pick up the network of 
others. He would use these wireless networks to check his email account and browse 
the internet. He did not access anyone’s private accounts on these occasions. There 
were other occasions, during the same timeframe, when Applicant actively penetrated 
other people’s wireless networks by using “tools” to discover the passwords for the 
network. Once penetrated, he would access the network and again check his email and 
browse the internet. He did not have permission to access these networks. He stated 
that his reason for accessing these networks was out of curiosity. He admitted that what 
he did could be considered “hacking.” He wanted to see if he could do it. He also 
admitted that he had reservations about using “tools” to retrieve passwords without 
authorization, but he did it anyway.4 
 
 In February 2011, Applicant filled out his security clearance application and was 
asked whether he had ever “illegally or without proper authorization entered into any 
information technology system.” He answered “no” to this question. When he was asked 
why he did not list this information on his application, he stated, “I did not recall the 
incidents when I was completing this.” I find this response not credible considering this 
specific topic was thoroughly addressed by AGA in July 2010. In November 2012, 
Applicant answered interrogatories sent to him by the Government and specifically 
stated that he accessed other people’s wireless accounts using “tools” to determine 
their passwords. He also stated that he did not access the people’s computers or open 
any of their files to retrieve personal information. His hearing testimony was consistent 
with his interrogatory answers.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 38; GE 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 39-43, 51-52, 55, 64-66; GE 3, 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 42-43, 58-60; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
 
5 
 
 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially relevant: 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; and 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 Applicant admitted to “hacking” into people’s wireless networks on multiple 
occasions between 2006 and 2009. He was not authorized to do so. However, 
concerning the other allegation stated in SOR ¶ 1.a, I conclude that there is insufficient 
evidence to support that he viewed the private accounts of others. There is also 
insufficient evidence to establish that he did not have authorization to take the computer 
hard drive home as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. I find that AG ¶ 40(a) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a in 
part. 
I also have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and I 
considered the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Although Applicant’s actions in “hacking” into other people’s wireless network 
occurred from 2006 to 2009, the reason he gave for doing so (i.e., he was curious to 
see if he could do it) shows a lack of good judgment and casts doubt on his reliability 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 41(a) does not apply.   
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the sexual behavior security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
 
6 
 
 
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
I have considered all of the sexual behavior disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
13 and the following are potentially applicable: 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 Applicant testified that he used the term voyeurism to describe his acts of viewing 
adult pornography. This action does not subject him to coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
There is no evidence to indicate that his actions were of a public nature or lacked 
discretion. Neither of the above listed disqualifying conditions applies.   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
 
7 
 
 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
Applicant’s “hacking” to gain password access into others wireless networks 
indicates untrustworthy behavior. AG ¶ 16(c) applies to SOR ¶ 3.a in part (see earlier 
discussion concerning SOR ¶ 1.a). For the reasons stated above under Guideline D, no 
disqualifying conditions apply to SOR ¶ 3.b. Applicant’s reliance on forgetfulness as an 
excuse for not answering the question about unauthorized access to computer systems 
on his security clearance application is not credible. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 3.c. 
The evidence does not support the allegation that Applicant was not truthful when he 
answered the Government’s interrogatories. His testimony was consistent with his 
earlier answers. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) do not apply to SOR ¶ 3.d. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  Failing to provide truthful and complete information on a security clearance 
application is never a minor offense. His untruthful answer casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
the Marine Corps. I also considered his intentional, purposeful acts of “hacking” into 
other person’s wireless networks. I also considered his reason for doing so-–because 
he wanted to see if he could do it---as an indicator of bad judgment. Applicant failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline M, 
use of information technology systems, and Guideline E, personal conduct The 
Government failed to establish a prima facie case under Guideline D, sexual behavior. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph  1.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph  1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph  2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph  3.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph  3.b:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph  3.c:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph  3.d:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
