 
1 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08849 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He has two judgments, 
collection accounts, and charged-off accounts totaling more than $24,000, which have 
yet to be resolved. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 10, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On February 11, 2013, Applicant answered the Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) and requested a hearing. On May 15, 2013, I was assigned the case. 
On May 31, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing convened on June 10, 2013. I admitted Government’s 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibit A, without objection. Applicant testified 
at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. No additional material was received.  On June 19, 2013, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied two charged-off and one 
collection account. He admitted the remaining allegations. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old supervisor who has worked for a defense contractor 
since April 2010, and seeks to maintain a secret security clearance. (Tr. 22) Applicant 
called no witnesses other than himself, and produced no work or character references. 
He was on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from September 1984 through September 
2004. He retired as a master sergeant (E-7). (Tr. 57) Following his retirement, he moved 
to another state. His wife, a registered nurse, was employed prior to his retirement, but 
was unemployed in the new location for one year before finding employment. (Ex. 2, Tr. 
24, 50)  
 
 Applicant’s income and Air Force retirement were insufficient to meet the 
household’s financial needs. In December 2004, three months after retiring from the Air 
Force, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (Tr. 48) In April 2005, his debts 
were discharged.  
 
 Applicant was employed for approximately 20 months when he learned his father 
had Alzheimer’s disease. (Tr. 25) He wanted to move closer to his father when he was 
called and offered a new position in a new state. (Tr. 25) In June 2006, Applicant 
obtained new employment on the opposite coast, which was closer to his father’s 
location. (Ex. 2) In July 2006, one week after arriving at their new location, his wife gave 
birth. (Tr. 26) In November 2007, she gave birth to another child.2 (Tr. 32) Due to the 
births and raising the children, his wife was unemployed for two years. (Tr. 32) At times, 
he used a credit card to pay another credit card bill. (Tr. 35) In August 2008, his wife 
regained employment. (Tr. 32)  
 
In June 2007, he purchased a home for $212,000. (Tr. 54) He put nothing down 
and financed 100 percent of the purchase price. (Tr. 54) His monthly payment on his 
first mortgage was $1,440 and $335 on his second mortgage. (Tr. 48)  
 
In October 2007, Applicant obtained the services of a debt financial service 
company to help him with his financial obligations. All communication with creditors 
went through the company. (Tr. 26) In 2009, creditors again started to contact Applicant. 
He learned the company went out of business after he had paid them several thousand 
dollars for their assistance in managing his financial affairs. (Ex. 2)  
                                                          
2 Applicant and his wife have seven children. His wife has a child from her first marriage. He had two 
children from his first marriage. And they had four children together. (Tr. 32) The children are ages 5, 6, 
12, 15, 25, 26, and 27. (Tr. 59) 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
In December 2009, a creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant in the 
amount of $5,642, attorney’s fees of $640, and court cost, plus $567 interest as of  
November 6, 2009 with interest continuing at seven percent annually thereafter. (Ex. 2) 
 
In April 2010, Applicant was laid off at work. He was unemployed for two weeks 
before starting his current job, which required him to relocate to another state. His wife 
was unemployed following the move to the new state. (Tr. 32) After leaving the home, 
he never made another mortgage payment on his home. (Tr. 47, 55) When he left, he 
hoped to arrange a short sale of his home at his prior location, but foreclosure occurred 
before he could arrange a sale. He was five months behind on his first mortgage of 
$1,440 and on his second mortgage of $335. (Tr. 48) The property sold for $124,901. 
(Tr. 45) Applicant has asked the bank for a letter of forgiveness.3 
 
 In March 2011, Applicant had a personal subject interview in which his finances 
were discussed. (Ex. 2) At that time, the delinquent SOR accounts were discussed.  
 
 In August 2012, Applicant paid $13,953, by weekly allotment, on a collection 
account not listed in the SOR. (Tr. 27) He was released from any and all obligation on 
the account. (Ex. 2, Tr. 20) The weekly allotments started at $100, which he later 
increased to $200 weekly. (Tr. 28)  
 
Applicant asserts he intends to fully pay his debts. (Tr. 24) His wife is now 
employed full-time, making $34,000 per year. (Tr. 58) His salary is just under $80,000 
and he receives $18,000 annually from his Air Force retirement. (Tr. 58) He stated he 
and his wife are now making more money than they have ever made before. The 
combined household annual income is $132,000. He asserts he does not have very 
much remaining income after paying his expenses, but does intend to contact his 
creditors. (Tr. 32) He has not received any financial counseling since 2007. 
 
A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection, and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows:  
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Judgment by bank on a 
credit card account. 
$2,095 Unpaid. The collection agency has 
made a settlement offer, but Applicant 
has not accepted the offer or made any 
payments on the debt. (Tr. 35)  
b Judgment. $5,642 
 
Unpaid. (Tr. 36)  
c Telephone service 
collection account. 
$555 
 
Paid. (Ex. A, Tr. 27) 
 
                                                          
3 Applicant provided no documentation pertaining to the state law provisions of mortgage companies 
seeking reimbursement following foreclosure of a primary residence. (Tr. 55) 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Collection account.  $7,152 Unpaid. Applicant has been 
unsuccessful in his attempts to contact 
the creditor. (Tr. 38) This is the same 
collection agency who obtained the 
judgment listed in b. above, but has not 
been established as the same debt. 
e Charged-off account. $4,316 Unpaid. Applicant has had no contact 
with the creditor. (Tr. 44) Last activity on 
this account was in 2007. (Tr. 45) 
f Charged-off account. 
 
$4,880 Unpaid. Applicant has had no contact 
with the creditor within the last five 
years. (Ex. 2) 
g Second mortgage was 
more than 120 days past 
due on $166,000 
balance. 
$1,340 
(Est.) 
House went to foreclosure. The house 
sold for $124,900 following the 
foreclosure. Applicant has asked the 
bank for a letter of forgiveness.  
h Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
filed in December 2004. 
Discharged in April 2005. 
 Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection 
three months after his retirement from 
the Air Force.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $24,640 This amount does not include the 
mortgage foreclosure. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
 
6 
 
 
 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He resorted to bankruptcy in 2004, 
three months after retiring from the Air Force. He has two judgments, collection 
accounts, and charged-off accounts which total more than $24,000. AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. In 
2005, all of his debts were discharged in bankruptcy and he was given a fresh financial 
start. I do not find against him for having to seek bankruptcy protection. SOR 1.h is 
found in his favor. However, he has numerous delinquent accounts and judgments yet 
to be addressed. Because he has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems 
are continuing in nature, he receives minimal application of the mitigating conditions 
listed in AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Likewise, Applicant receives partial application of the mitigating conditions listed 
in AG ¶ 20(b), for his wife was unemployed for varying periods when he accepted 
employment in new locations. However, the last period of unemployment occurred 
following his move in 2010. Except for two weeks in 2010, Applicant has been employed 
full-time since retiring from the Air Force in 2004. The household’s annual income is 
 
7 
 
 
 
$132,000. Given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, he has 
failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to resolve his 
debts and failed to reduce his delinquencies.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He has not received 
financial counseling in the last five years and his delinquent obligations have yet to be 
fully addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because, to 
date, Applicant’s efforts to address his delinquent accounts have been minimal. One 
delinquent telephone account was paid by allotment. There is no documentary evidence 
to support his assertions that he contacted any of his creditors and tried to arrange 
repayment plans. He asserted one creditor has made a settlement offer. An offer was 
made, but he has yet to accept the offer and make payments on the debt. He did pay 
the obligation in SOR 1.c ($555). AG ¶ 20(d) applies to this single debt. Applicant has 
failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His wife went through several periods of unemployment 
following the birth of their children and after moving with her husband to a new state for 
his employment. Applicant honorably served in the Air Force and retired as a master 
sergeant. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Even though the annual household income is $132,000, Applicant asserts he has little 
money each month to address his past due obligations. He states he would like to pay 
 
8 
 
 
 
his past-due delinquent debts, but has made no payments on them and has yet to 
contact some of the creditors. His long-standing failure to repay his creditors, at least in 
reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid the judgments and delinquent 
accounts, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially 
addressed his delinquent obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d — 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
