KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Applicant failed to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-05949.a1
DATE: 08/29/2013
DATE: August 29, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-05949
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 8, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On June 25, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge David M. White denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
1“Q: . . . So you drove for some of the . . . time, but then you turned the wheel over to your friend?  A: Yes.
We were playing golf.  And I drove initially.  And then I said, “Hey, you know, I’d rather have you drive.”  Tr. at 51.
2
The Judge found:  Applicant began drinking alcohol around age 18.  He consumed alcohol,
at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from about 1991 to December 2012.  He became
intoxicated after three to five drinks and did so one to three times a week, until at least April 2012.
Applicant has been charged with DUI three times.  The first, in 1991, resulted in a dismissal
of charges because Applicant was not driving the car at the time of the arrest.1  In 2009, Applicant
was again arrested for DUI.  He had consumed about six mixed drinks at a bar and attempted to
drive home.  He hit a patch of ice, spun out of control, crashed through a fence, and came to a stop
in a vacant field.  Applicant told police that he had drunk three beers at a local bar.  Subsequent
breath analysis yielded results of .173 and .179.  Applicant pled guilty to reckless driving and was
sentenced to 365 days confinement (with 363 suspended and two days converted to community
service), fines, and court costs.  Applicant was also required to attend a DUI Victim’s Panel and an
Alcohol/Drug Information School.  He reduced his drinking somewhat during this period.  An
alcohol assessment determined that he had no significant problem with alcohol.  
Applicant answered DOHA interrogatories in May, 2012.  In these answers Applicant stated
that he drank to the point of intoxication about once a week, but he advised that he did not intend
to continue drinking alcohol.  In February 2012, Applicant was arrested a third time for DUI.  He
had consumed three to six drinks containing Scotch, although it could have been more.  He
attempted to drive home, swerved over the center lane, and hit an oncoming car head-on.  The
person in the car Applicant hit was not seriously hurt.  Contrary to his statement of intention in the
DOHA interrogatory, dated May 1, 2012, Applicant continued drinking until December 2012.  
Applicant demonstrated a month of successful participation in an outpatient alcohol
treatment program and was granted entry into a deferred prosecution program.  This program
authorizes persons who have committed alcohol-related crimes and who are alcohol dependent to
receive treatment for two years.  If the offender succeeds in treatment, prosecution is deferred for
an additional three years, after which charges are dismissed.  Failure results in a conviction and
imposition of sentence.  As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had completed the first phase of the
treatment program.  He attends the required number of Alcoholics Anonymous meetings but does
not have a sponsor because he has not found someone he trusts.  He regularly goes to bars with
friends but says that he does not consume alcohol.  Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the
quality of his work performance.
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under Guideline G.
He noted that Applicant had operated a vehicle on three occasions while drunk and that he had a
history of habitual and binge consumption of alcohol.  He stated that Applicant’s history of alcohol-
related offenses, the most recent having occurred after he submitted his application for a clearance,
2“[T]he individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling . . . and has received a
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker[.]”   AE E describes
Applicant’s compliance with the requirements of his treatment program but it does not forecast the outcome of
Applicant’s treatment program.  
3
evidenced bad judgment and does not permit a conclusion that his alcohol problems are in the past.
The Judge stated that Applicant had provided no evidence of a substantial support network or of a
favorable prognosis concerning future alcohol abuse.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated
that Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, combined with regular attendance at bars and a recent
DUI, raised doubt about his worthiness for a clearance that must be resolved in favor of national
security.
Applicant’s brief contains evidence not included in the record concerning the circumstances
of his drinking habits.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  See ISCR
Case No. 12-05359 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 7, 2013).  Applicant contends that the record does not
support the Judge’s conclusion that his drinking evidenced bad judgment.  He stated that there was
no evidence that his judgement was impaired or that he drank to excess.  The SOR alleged that
Applicant drank, at times to excess, from 1991 to 2012, and Applicant admitted that allegation, as
he did those concerning his DUI arrests.  These admissions, and the evidence in the record, support
the challenged statement by the Judge.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s statement that he did not present evidence of a favorable
prognosis or of a support network.  He contends that Applicant Exhibit (AE) E constitutes a
favorable prognosis.  We have examined this document and conclude that it does not contain a
prognosis within the meaning of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 23(d).2  AE E also states that Applicant
“reports having a home group.”  Given evidence that Applicant still regularly visits a bar with
friends who drink alcohol, the quoted language is not sufficient to undermine the Judge’s conclusion
that Applicant has not evidenced a substantial support network.  The Judge’s statements constitute
reasonable characterizations of the record that was before him.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-11904
at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 10, 2009).    
Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider evidence of his having held a clearance for
many years without incident or concern.  While this was evidence that the Judge was required to
consider, along with all the other evidence in the record, a Judge is not required to make findings
about or to discuss every piece of record evidence, which would be a practical impossibility.
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05556 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 23, 2011).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
4
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
