 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-09682  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The concerns raised 
by the January 2011 foreclosure of Applicant’s home are mitigated because his finances 
are currently under control. However, Applicant’s drugs use, which resumed after his 
security clearance was upgraded in 2009 and continued during the current review of his 
security clearance, is not mitigated. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2012, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the drug involvement, personal conduct, and financial 
considerations guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
 Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on June 11, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, without objection. Applicant timely submitted AE 
G post-hearing and it is also admitted without objection.2 The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the transcript (Tr.) on June 19, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
Applicant, 35, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
September 2008 as an engineer. Initially granted a secret clearance in 2007, Applicant 
obtained a Top secret clearance in 2009. During the course of both investigations, 
Applicant disclosed marijuana use that occurred between 2002 and 2004. He stopped 
using the marijuana before his marriage in 2005 at the request of his wife. An incident 
report in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) regarding Applicant’s 
February 2011 home foreclosure triggered the present adjudication.3  
 
In 2006, Applicant purchased a single-family home, sitting on 0.18 acres of land 
for $348,000. Applicant financed the property with two purchase money mortgages4 for 
$248,000 and $50,000, respectively, secured by a deed of trust. At the time, Applicant 
and his wife, who were expecting their first child in early 2007, earned a joint income of 
approximately $75,000. A few months later, Applicant obtained a loan to purchase a 
$45,000 car. After the birth of their child, Applicant and his wife decided that she would 
not work outside the home. Applicant cites this decision as the genesis of his financial 
problems. For the next two years, Applicant struggled to meet his family’s financial 
obligations on a single income. He relied on credit cards to make ends meet, 
accumulating $20,000 in consumer debt. In 2008, Applicant realized that the 
arrangement was not sustainable. Between August 2009 and February 2010, he 
attempted to negotiate a short sale with his mortgage holders, but the secondary 
mortgage holder would not agree to the terms of sale. In the summer of 2009, he 
stopped paying the mortgage, but stayed in the home until December 2010.  During that 
period, Applicant diverted the funds previously earmarked for the mortgage to resolve 
other financial obligations, including the couple’s car loans and credit card debt. The 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 The Government’s memorandum regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission is included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.  
 
3  Tr. 19-20, 51; GE 1-4. 
 
4 A “purchase money mortgage” for purposes of State 1’s antideficiency statutes is one that encumbers 
the property being sold. Cely v. DeConcini, 803 P.2d, 911, 916 (1990). 
 
 
3 
 
trust holder foreclosed on the home in January 2011, selling it at auction a month later 
for $154,000.5  
 
Applicant and his wife purchased their current residence in April 2011 for 
$169,000, using a private loan obtained from Applicant’s parents. Applicant, who earns 
$95,000 annually, lives within his means and does not have any outstanding consumer 
debt. Applicant and his wife have changed their attitude toward money in hopes of 
preventing their past financial problems from recurring.6 
 
In addition to financial problems, Applicant’s 2011 background investigation 
revealed recent drug use. At times, Applicant used family member’s prescription pain 
medication to address his own medical issues, but his use of prescription narcotics was 
largely recreational. In the midst of his 2009 security clearance investigation, Applicant 
began using drugs with his brother-in-law. Applicant and his brother-in-law would ingest 
narcotic pain medication, sometimes mixing different types of medications, while 
drinking alcohol at Applicant’s home. In 2010, Applicant’s brother-in-law gave him some 
marijuana for his personal use. Applicant stowed the drug in his car for at least a year, 
claiming that he had no intention of using the drug, but did not know how to properly 
dispose of it. Applicant did not return the unwanted drugs to his brother-in-law for fear of 
offending him. After his 2011 subject interview, during which his history of illegal drug 
use was discussed at length, Applicant flushed the drugs down the toilet and disavowed 
future use of any illegal drug because it could interfere with his ability to retain his 
security clearance. In June 2012, Applicant used marijuana during both days of a two-
day concert he attended with his brother-in-law.7  
 
Applicant has not used any illegal drugs since June 2012. He again vows not to 
use illegal drugs or abuse prescription drugs in the future, wishing to be a better 
example for his three children, ages two, four, and six. Although he still frequently 
socializes with his brother-in-law, Applicant has asked him to refrain from offering him 
drugs. Applicant believes his brother-in-law, a new father, will comply with Applicant’s 
request.8  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 22-26, 79-85; GE 5- 6; AE G. 
 
6 Tr. 25-26, 28-69; GE 5. 
 
7 Tr. 28-33, 39-44, 52-60; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 21-22, 60-62. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
   
Drug Involvement 
 
 “Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness . . . because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”9 Applicant 
has a history of illegal drug use dating back to 2002.10 He began abusing prescription 
drugs and resumed smoking marijuana after being granted a security clearance. He 
continued to use drugs while his access to classified information was under review.11 In 
addition to his drug use, he stored illegal drugs in his car for at least a year.12  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to mitigate his disqualifying conduct. Applicant’s 
history of drug use casts doubts on his current security worthiness. His behavior shows 
a disregard for the law and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily entered into with the 
government when he was granted access to classified information. Applicant’s conduct 
also shows his lack of judgment. Not only did he willfully engage in illegal activity, he 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 24. 
 
10 AG ¶ 25(a). 
 
11 AG ¶ 25(g). 
 
12 AG ¶ 25(c). 
 
 
5 
 
exposed others – his family and any other unsuspecting passengers in his car – to the 
consequences of his criminal conduct. Despite Applicant’s statements to the contrary, 
the record does not support a finding that he will not continue to use drugs in the future. 
Applicant continues to associate with his brother-in-law, his supplier and enabler. 
Furthermore, Applicant is unable to identify any life changes, beyond his brother-in-law 
becoming a parent, which may provide a deterrent for future use. He used drugs in 
direct contravention of his wife’s wishes and after becoming a father. He also continued 
to use illegal drugs after his statements in his 2007 and 2011 subject interviews with a 
background investigator disavowing any future use. He has not signed a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any future violation.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The allegations regarding Applicant’s history of illegal drug use are cross-alleged 
under the personal conduct guideline. For the reasons discussed under the drug 
involvement concern, the conduct is disqualifying. If Applicant’s recent history of drug 
abuse and possession became known it could affect his professional and community 
standing.13 None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”14 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes the secondary mortgage holder a 
deficiency balance of $50,000 after the trustee’s sale of his home in February 2011. 
Applicant denies that allegation, arguing that he is protected by his state’s anti-
deficiency law. According to the statute:15 
 
If a trust property of two and one-half aces or less which is limited to and 
utilized for either a single one-family or a single two-family dwelling is sold 
pursuant to the trustee’s power of sale, no action may be maintained to 
                                                          
13  AG 16(e). 
 
14  AG ¶ 18. 
 
15 At hearing, Applicant presented State 1’s anti-deficiency statute covering purchase money mortgages. 
Because Applicant’s home was sold pursuant to a deed of trust, I am taking administrative notice, sua 
sponte, of the anti-deficiency statute as it applies to the sale or foreclosure of properties by a trust deed. 
Neither the Government nor Applicant objected to my considering the statute. 
 
 
6 
 
recover any difference in the amount obtained by the sale and the amount 
of the indebtedness and any interest, costs, and expenses.16 
 
 The statute, which also applies to secondary mortgages even if the second 
mortgage holder did not exercise its rights under the second deed of trust, intended to 
protect certain homeowners from the financial disasters of losing their homes to 
foreclosure plus all of their other non-exempt property on the execution of a judgment 
for the balance of the purchase price.17 While resolving issues of state law is not ideal in 
the context of security clearance cases, in cases such as this one where the statutory 
language is clear on its face, and the case law interpreting the statute is also clear, the 
speculation or conjecture regarding the applicability of the statute is absent. Applicant’s 
property falls within the plain language of the statute and he is protected by the anti-
deficiency statute.  
 
 However, a finding that the SOR debts are legally uncollectible does not end the 
inquiry into Applicant’s security worthiness; the facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner must 
also be examined.18 Applicant’s decision to accumulate over $400,000 in consumer 
debt he could not afford to pay, resulting in the foreclosure of his home impugns his 
judgment and overall security worthiness. Applicant’s actions demonstrate his inability 
to pay his debts and establish his history of failing to do so.19 Applicant’s financial 
problems were not caused by events beyond his control, but he has since taken steps 
to regain control of his finances. Applicant’s current housing expenses are 
commensurate with his income and he has eliminated his consumer debt. Applicant 
may have to deal with the negative consequences of a foreclosure on his credit report, 
but it does not serve as a source of vulnerability or exploitation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I have doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is 
to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the personal is an acceptable security risk.”20 Applicant has breached 
his fiduciary duty to the government by engaging in off-duty conduct that impaired his 
judgment and created areas of vulnerability and exploitation. Applicant has proven 
himself an unacceptable security risk. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                          
16 HE A. 
 
17 Baker v. Gardner, 770 P.2d 766 (1988). 
 
18See ISCR Case No. 10-07393 (App. Bd. Jun. 16, 2012). 
  
19 AG ¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
20 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    Against  Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
