 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-01933 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jon L. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B and 
Guideline E, but failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence), Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated November 15, 2012, Applicant addressed the SOR allegations 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On January 22, 2013, the SOR 
was amended to expand the allegations under Guideline E. A timely response to the 
 
 
 
 
2 
amendments was received on February 15, 2013. In the interim, the case was assigned 
to me on January 29, 2013.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 15, 2013, setting the hearing for March 21, 2013. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1-16 and a request for 
administrative notice was offered as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. They were accepted 
without objection. Applicant offered testimony and five documents, which were accepted 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-E without objection. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) 
was received on March 29, 2013. On May 15, 2013, the Government received 
additional material from Applicant without objection. That file was accepted into the 
record as AX F and the record was closed. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of Colombia. It was accepted into the record as HE 1 
without objection. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common request for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known 
or from Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various 
facts pertaining to Colombia were derived from HE 1 and its attachments. The facts thus 
derived are contained infra under the subheading “Colombia” of this decision. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old assistant engineer who has worked for the same 
employer since October 2011. He is married to his second wife and has three minor 
children. Before permanently moving to this country from Colombia, he visited family 
that had already immigrated to the United States. On a trip in December 1992, he was 
arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI). He pled guilty, was sentenced to pay a fine, 
and had his state driver’s license suspended for one year. In 1994, Applicant moved to 
this country “looking for new opportunities.” (Tr. 34) He initially worked in the service 
industry before pursuing a career in computers. At age 27, he earned a technical 
certificate in network engineering and data communications, then sought employment in 
that field. He became a United States citizen in 2007.  
 
 Married in July 2010, Applicant’s current wife is a college student. She is a citizen 
of Colombia and a permanent resident of the United States. She intends to apply for 
United States citizenship by the end of the year.  
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant’s parents are dual citizens of the United States and Colombia. Like 
their son, they came to the United States in 1994. His father held a job with the 
Colombian government a few decades ago, but receives no pension. (Tr. 40-41, 48) 
Applicant’s father no longer has contact with his former peers. He never served in a 
foreign military. He lives in the United States with Applicant’s mother, a homemaker with 
no nexus to a foreign government or military. They speak with Applicant weekly. Neither 
parent has any financial interest or holding abroad. Neither have plans to return to 
Colombia. Their only significant contact with anyone remaining in Colombia is with 
Applicant’s father’s nonagenarian mother, a housewife. (Tr. 53-54) Applicant states that 
his parents consider the United States to be their home and that they are dual citizens 
only because they were not afforded the opportunity to formally renounce their 
Colombian citizenship.  
 
Remaining in Colombia is Applicant’s aforementioned grandmother, with whom 
Applicant speaks by phone once or twice a year. Also in Colombia is his mother-in-law, 
a retired hair stylist. She has never been employed by a government agency. 
Applicant’s wife speaks with her about once a week, whereas Applicant speaks with her 
monthly. Applicant also has some extended family remaining in Colombia. Due to his 
own involvement with family, work, and friends in the United States, Applicant’s contact 
with these individuals has dwindled considerably. He now feels “distant” from them. 
(Response to the SOR at 6 of 26) None of these individuals know what Applicant does 
for a living. 
 
On March 7, 2003, around the time he divorced his first wife, Applicant was 
depressed over the dissolution of his marriage, his wife’s infidelity, and her attempt to 
take their daughter away from him. He went to dinner with a coworker who had also 
been divorced. At dinner, he drank too much alcohol. On his way home, he was 
arrested for DWI. He pled guilty to the charge, was fined $200, ordered to attend an 
alcohol awareness class, and had his license suspended for a year. As a result of this 
incident, Applicant now rarely imbibes alcohol. (Answer to the SOR at 11 of 26)  
 
In 2005, while working in the computer field, Applicant decided to use some of 
his savings and open a restaurant. Within a year, he knew the business was not doing 
well. This reckoning came as a financial crisis began to loom over the United States. 
After closing the restaurant, he had about $70,000 in debt. A bankruptcy attorney 
advised him to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which he did in December 2006. It was 
discharged in May 2007. In the interim, Applicant received required financial counseling. 
 
In executing a Security Clearance Application (SCA) on or about April 16, 2009, 
and again on March 27, 2010, Applicant was asked in Section 22 whether he had 
“EVER” been charged with any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. (capitalized in the 
original) Applicant answered “yes,” but only mentioned the 1992 DWI, not the more 
recent 2003 DWI arrest and conviction. He did so as an oversight, not as a deliberate 
act of falsification or obfuscation. (Tr. 107) In interviews on June 23, 2009, and on May 
4, 2010, he only admitted to the 2003 DWI. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
In October 2011, Applicant and his wife had a disagreement as to what to do that 
evening. An argument ensued and voices were raised. They struggled to gain 
possession of the telephone. Applicant’s wife dialed 911. Applicant heard the operator 
and suddenly relinquished the receiver. With no corresponding resistance, Applicant’s 
wife’s grabbing of the phone led her to smack herself with the handset. (Tr. 102) An 
officer arrived and assumed Applicant had struck his wife. At trial, Applicant and his wife 
explained what had happened. The charges were nolle prosequi. The incident stands 
out as an isolated incident. The couple generally does not disagree. Applicant does not 
have a history of violence. (Tr. 103). 
 
During a January 2012 interview, Applicant stated that he had never worked for a 
foreign company. At one time, he was set to be assigned to work for a certain foreign 
entity. That job, however, fell through at the last minute. (Tr. 112-113) 
 
Investigators found several debts noted in Applicant’s credit reports, as set forth 
in the following SOR allegations: 
 
2.b. -- $26,935 judgment filed against him in October 2011. Applicant borrowed 
money from an in-law in 2004 or 2005. The loan was not explicitly listed in the 2006 
bankruptcy petition, and Applicant continued making payments on the loan through 
2010. When Applicant discovered there was a judgment against him based on the loan, 
he contacted a lawyer. He was advised that since the debt predated his bankruptcy, it 
should have been constructively considered to have been part of that bankruptcy. (Tr. 
139, 147) In October 2010, Applicant moved the district court to vacate the judgment 
regarding the loan. The court denied Applicant’s claim that the debt should have been 
considered to have been in the 2006 bankruptcy. (Tr. 140) A motion for reconsideration 
was also denied. The issue is now on appeal before the circuit court. (Tr. 66-67, 142-
143; Ex. E) Presently, the status of the debt is unresolved and there is no indication that 
he does not owe the debt. (Tr. 144)  
 
2.c./2.d. -- $98 and $285 medical accounts related to a car accident reported as 
unpaid in August 2012. Applicant denies that these charges are his, noting that they 
should have been paid by the other driver’s insurance company. (Tr. 69) He stated in 
January 2013 that he advised the creditors that there was a mistake. As of the hearing, 
he was planning to dispute these entries with the credit reporting bureaus. There is no 
documented evidence from either before or after the hearing showing that he has 
formally disputed these entries with either the credit bureaus or the noted creditors.  
  
2.e./2.f. -- $8,300 and $9,234 debts (a voluntary repossession of a 2006 vehicle 
purchased in 2010 and a charged-off account, respectively). Applicant was led to 
believe that returning the 2006 vehicle erased any liability for that car. (Tr. 79-80) No 
notable documentary evidence regarding these automobiles, their return, or the 
consequences of their repossession was introduced at the hearing. (Tr. 84) He similarly 
believed returning the other vehicle also absolved him of liability. (Tr. 94)  Applicant 
pointed to credit entries indicating a current zero balance on the accounts, but those 
entries also reflect that the accounts were previously charged-off. (Tr. 87) Debts are not 
 
 
 
 
5 
satisfied because they are charged-off, leading to a zero balance. (Tr. 87) Applicant 
explained that he discussed the cars with the creditors, but received no documentation 
substantiating his efforts or the current status of the debts. (Tr. 88-89; Ex. F) There is no 
documented evidence from either before or after the hearing showing that he has ever 
formally disputed these entries with either the credit bureaus or the noted creditors. 
Applicant was given time after the hearing to submit evidence regarding these accounts. 
 
2.g. -- $1,760 past-due account. Applicant denied having had an account with 
this merchant since the early 2000s, when his first wife had a credit union account 
through this entity. (Tr. 95-96) They divorced in 2002. After the divorce, Applicant paid 
off a car debt through this account. He assumed the account was automatically closed 
when the car debt was paid. (Tr. 96) The creditor told him that it has no record of this 
debt. (Tr. 96) The most recent credit report shows a zero balance with no past-due 
amount. This debt is no longer at issue. (Tr. 99-100)  
 
Applicant has acquired a string of traffic offenses. He was convicted of speeding 
once in 2007, twice in 2009, thrice in 2010, and once in 2011. He was also convicted of 
failing to display his license to a uniformed police officer in February 2010, driving with 
license revoked and failure to keep proper control of vehicle in August 2010, driving 
without a license in September 2010, and failure to obey a highway sign in September 
2011. Applicant attributes these infractions to his repeated trips across country to visit 
with family and friends. Since late 2011, he has made a concerted effort to watch his 
driving and to closely follow traffic laws. (Tr. 120-122)  
 
Today, Applicant maintains a bank account and a modest retirement account in 
the United States. He rents his family’s home. He lives within his means. He has settled 
into the life of a family man and rarely imbibes liquor. At work, Applicant is well regarded 
and considered a reliable employee. He submitted six highly favorable letters of 
recommendation. (Exs. M-R) He has completed multiple training programs and received 
several professional honors. (Exs. H-L) 
 
     Colombia 
 
Colombia is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with extensive strategic ties to 
the United States. Colombian citizens enjoy rights similar to U.S. citizens. International 
observers described the May 2006 elections as free and fair, despite efforts by terrorist 
groups to interfere in the election process. 
 
In the past, Colombia had significant internal problems because of the powerful 
drug cartels. With strong support from the United States, the drug cartel problems have 
been reduced. The citizens of Colombia and other countries face serious threats from 
terrorist and paramilitary organizations within Colombia, but not the Colombian 
government. The United States is fully committed to supporting the Colombian 
government in its efforts to defeat Colombian-based foreign terrorist organizations and 
narco-terrorists. In recent years, Colombia has expanded its role as a regional leader in 
counter-terrorism.  
 
 
 
 
6 
The Colombian government cooperates with U.S. and international organizations 
on human rights issues. Despite this fact, arrests of suspected terrorists and 
paramilitary can lead to human rights violations for these detainees. In Colombia, 
human rights violations are often committed, not by the government, but by terrorist 
organizations. In response to these problems, the Colombian government successfully 
improved human rights and security issues; for example a reduction in massacres and 
kidnapping, through effective law enforcement supported by an active judiciary. Again, 
through effective judicial decisions, the prosecutors successfully investigated and 
prosecuted links between politicians and paramilitary groups. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
 
 
7 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, 
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7. 
One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife is a Colombian citizen residing legally in the United States with 
plans to apply for U.S. citizenship later this year. Applicant’s parents are dual citizens of 
the United States and Colombia. All three have resided in the United States for many 
years. There is no evidence any of these three have any plans to leave their settled 
lives in the United States. There is no evidence that any have notable financial or 
property interests in that country. Applicant’s nonagenarian grandmother and mother-in-
law are citizens and residents of Colombia, with whom Applicant and his wife maintain 
telephonic contact. With the exception of Applicant’s father, none of these kin have any 
nexus to the Colombian government or military. Applicant’s father worked for the 
Colombian government decades ago. However, he maintains no contact with his former 
work peers and receives no pension.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a heightened 
risk. The heightened risk required to raise a disqualifying condition is a relatively low 
standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having 
a family member living under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign 
nation. Terrorist groups and other criminal organizations operate within Colombia. They 
participate in kidnappings and other criminal activities. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
allegations.  
 
Here, the primary concern is Applicant’s relationships with his mother, father, and 
wife, all of whom are long term residents of the United States. Their possessions and 
their lives are here. Applicant’s parents’ only remaining personal nexus in Colombia is a 
90+ year old grandmother with limited life expectancy. His wife’s nexus to Colombia is 
her mother, a retired hair dresser. Neither have any ties to the Colombian government 
or military, nor is there evidence that they are involved in narco-terrorism or the fight 
against narco-terrorism. The likelihood of their being used by a foreign government or 
interest to influence, compromise, or oblige Applicant is exceptionally remote. Moreover, 
it is clear that Applicant’s loyalties are based here. He immigrated here in search of a 
better life. Here, he has been educated, found a career, married, built a family, and 
thrived. He is close to his parents here. His home and his banked savings are here. 
There is sufficient evidence suggesting he has deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States that would result in any conflicts of interest being resolved 
in favor of the United States. Therefore, I find that AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(b) apply.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
 
 
 
 
9 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
At issue here is Applicant’s 2006 bankruptcy, which was deemed necessary as 
his new restaurant quickly failed at the onset of poor financial times. As a requirement of 
the bankruptcy proceeding, he received financial counseling. These two facts raise AG 
¶ 20(b) and AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
Less can be said about the remaining debts. Applicant did not include a $26,935 
loan from an in-law in his 2006 bankruptcy. Rather, he continued making payments on 
that loan through 2010, when he discovered it had been made into an adverse 
judgment.  He now argues that the adverse judgment should have been included in his 
2006 bankruptcy. One court disagreed with Applicant’s assertion that the judgment 
 
 
 
 
10 
should have been part of the bankruptcy; Applicant has appealed this decision to the 
circuit court. To date, however, no court has set aside, vacated, remanded, or otherwise 
altered the district court’s finding. Without more, or until a future court finds to the 
contrary, I conclude that this debt remains valid and owed.  
 
Applicant denies responsibility for approximately $400 in medical bills, but 
provided no documentary evidence showing he has formally disputed the inclusion of 
these debts on his credit report with either the health care provider or the credit 
reporting bureau. The same may be said of the nearly $17,500 in debt noted as owed 
for the two vehicles at issue.  Although Applicant’s oral testimony regarding these debts 
was credible, paper evidence is required to support Applicant’s contentions and 
document his efforts to address. Lacking that, I find none of the available mitigating 
conditions applicable for this nearly $45,000 in unaddressed debt. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
At issue are multiple allegations that Applicant falsified material facts on SCAs 
and interviews. Applicant has raised issues related to personal conduct in several 
different contexts. While speeding tickets generally do not play heavily into this process, 
here, they represent a 2007 to 2011 period of disregard of the rules of the road. Under 
these circumstances, the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
AG ¶16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
 
 
 
 
11 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicting that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations); and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, 
such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing). 
 
For AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) to apply, Applicant’s omissions must be deliberate. 
The Government established that Applicant’s disclosure of facts regarding the number 
of drinking and driving offenses was less than complete. He argues that it was simply 
an oversight. When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or 
state of mind at the time the omission occurred. (See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 1, 2004)(explaining ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 
2004)). Here, there is no evidence discrediting Applicant’s plausible and credible 
testimony that his failure to disclose was inadvertent. This is especially true since the 
information he did provide was more than sufficient to put investigators on notice that 
his driving record was an issue. In turn, with such notice, it would be almost inevitable 
that investigators would discover any and all additional incidents. 
 
We are thus left with multiple incidents of unintentionally incomplete statements 
and a string of speeding and driving-related incidents. Taken piecemeal, not one is of 
special significance. Taken as a whole, however, they still fail to show that Applicant’s 
personal conduct demonstrates that he is untrustworthy and unable of protecting 
classified information. This is particularly true given Applicant’s ameliorative actions to 
monitor his driving in the future, and two years of being free of any additional driving 
infractions. Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, 
or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
 
12 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old assistant engineer who has worked for the same 
employer since October 2011. He is married to his second wife and has three minor 
children. He came to this country from Colombia to seek a better life. Over the years, he 
has acquired a mixture of criminal and civil charges, the majority of which involved 
speeding and driving-related infractions. Applicant mitigated these activities under 
personal conduct because he has since outgrown such behavior, matured, and is now 
focused on adult responsibilities. While his answers to his SCA and interviewer 
questions may not have been complete, either because it slipped his mind or due to 
linguistic confusion, they gave sufficient notice to the investigators of areas worthy of 
further investigation, and there is no evidence that his answers were intentionally false. 
As for foreign influence, given the country at issue and the relatives at issue, it is highly 
unlikely that any of Applicant’s kin could be used as a tool of coercion against him. 
 
My main concern is related to the delinquent debts attributed to Applicant. I do 
not doubt that he is earnest in pursuing an appeal regarding the $26,935 judgment. I 
note, however, that his continued payments on this debt through 2010 to a former in-law 
suggest that his current legal argument was recently adopted, and that it is highly likely 
it was intentionally not in Applicant’s 2006 bankruptcy because the loan was from an in-
law. At this point in time, however, the court has found him liable for the judgment and I 
cannot predict the result of his appeal. Even if that debt is eventually subsumed into his 
2006 bankruptcy, however, there remains over $17,500 in automobile-related debt that 
lacks documentary evidence showing it has been resolved or formally disputed with 
either the creditors or the credit reporting bureaus. While formally disputing a credit 
bureau report entry does not guaranty that a debt will be deemed satisfied, addressed, 
or deleted from a credit report, it is a simple process. Yet Applicant apparently failed to 
pursue this course when he was unable to secure alternative documentation regarding 
his past dealings with the creditor after the hearing. For lack of documentation regarding 
these debts, Applicant fails his burden and financial considerations security concerns 
are sustained. Therefore, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns 
arising under Guideline F.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
13 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b.-2f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:    For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.r:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
