 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07309 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 13, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 24, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 15, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on August 7, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
 
2 
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The 
record was left open until August 21, 2013, for Applicant to submit matters. He 
submitted documents that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. All of 
the proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 15, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old electronic technician who works for a defense 
contractor. He has been working for his current employer since October 2010. He 
graduated from high school in 2000 and earned an associate’s degree in mechanical 
engineering technology in 2008. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps from September 
2001 to March 2005, attained the grade of lance corporal (E-3), and received an 
honorable discharge. He married in August 2001 and divorced in March 2005. He 
married his current wife in May 2005, and they separated about two months before the 
hearing. He has custody of his two children, ages 10 and 12. He stated that he has not 
held a security clearance in the past.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 11 delinquent debts totaling $65,462; that he 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002 that was dismissed in 2003; and that he filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 that resulted in a discharge of his debts later that year. In 
his Answer, Applicant admitted 12 of the 13 SOR allegations. He denied the largest 
debt, SOR ¶ 1.c, claiming he hired a lawyer to dispute that debt. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
 In June 2002, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Because he failed to make 
payments on that bankruptcy, it was dismissed in January 2003. He then filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in September 2005 that resulted in a discharge of his debts in December 
2005. In an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on March 16, 2011, 
Applicant stated that his accounts in the bankruptcy became delinquent because he and 
his ex-wife were spending beyond their means. He noted that he did try a debt 
consolidation loan while in the Marine Corps, but was unable to pay that loan. At the 
time of his bankruptcy, his financial liabilities were approximately $61,000.3 
 
 During his OPM interview, Applicant first attributed his current financial problems 
to his current wife missing work for several months following her surgery in 2010. She 
then worked part-time until about two months before the hearing when she returned to 
fulltime work. In the OPM interview, he also attributed his financial problems to paying 
about $20,000 in legal fees during a child custody dispute that he had with his ex-wife. 
He went through that child custody dispute about a year or two after his divorce. During 
the OPM interview, he stated that he intended to set up payment arrangements for all of 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-8, 27, 38-39, 60, 66-67; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 Tr. at 53-54, 65-69; GE 1, 2, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
his delinquent debts in the next couple of days as he and his wife were in a position to 
begin paying them again.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c for $57,689 arose from an employment contract. Under 
that contract, Applicant’s employer paid him a salary and his tuition while he was a 
fulltime student at a community college. Applicant did not work at the company while 
attending school, but would work there during school breaks. As noted above, Applicant 
completed his studies at the community college in 2008 and earned an associate’s 
degree. After completing his schooling, Applicant was apparently supposed to work for 
the employer for a specified period.5 
 
 Applicant claimed that, after he earned his associate’s degree, the employer 
attempted to change the employment contract and reduce his salary. He refused to 
work for the employer. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is apparently the employer’s attempt to 
recoup the amount of salary and tuition Applicant was paid while he attended school. 
Applicant testified that he hired a lawyer to dispute this debt in 2009. At the hearing, he 
testified that he did not know the status of the dispute. In his post-hearing submission, 
he provided an email in which the lawyer acknowledged providing Applicant legal 
services during that period. Applicant also submitted a credit bureau report dated 
August 22, 2013, that reflected the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c has been deleted from his credit 
report.6 
 
 Appellant did not provide any proof that he made payments on the remaining ten 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d through 1.k) totaling about $7,773. Most of those debts 
had dates of first delinquency/dates of last activity in 2010. Other than stating that he 
was “trying to work towards getting to the point where [he] can start knocking those 
[debts] off [his] credit report,” he presented no specific plan for resolving those debts.7 
 
 While serving in the Marine Corps, Applicant and his ex-wife sought financial 
counseling before filing bankruptcy. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a 
monthly budget that reflected his monthly income was $2,260 and his monthly expenses 
were $1,921, which left him a net monthly remainder of $339. The budget did not reflect 
any payments toward the delinquent debts. He testified that he owed the Federal 
Government about $1,000 in past-due taxes for 2012. He also believed that he and his 
wife were about one month behind on their mortgage payments.8 
 
 In the Marine Corps, Applicant received a Good Conduct Medal. He was 
discharged from the Marine Corps due to a personality disorder. His discharge occurred 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 25-28, 42-49, 54-55; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 28-35; GE 2-5. 
 
6 Tr. at 35-38, 68-69; GE 2-5; AE B, D. 
 
7 Tr. at 57-58, 72-73; GE 2-5. 
 
8 Tr. at 39-49, 52-65, 70-72; GE 2; AE C. 
 
 
4 
 
about a year before his military service obligation was due to expire. He served in 
Kuwait and Iraq during Operation Iraqi Freedom.9 
 
 Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 49-52; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 In December 2005, Applicant was granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. He 
filed bankruptcy because he and his ex-wife spent beyond their means. Since the 
bankruptcy, he accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. From the evidence presented, I 
am unable to determine that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 In 2010, his wife had surgery and missed several months of work. She then 
worked part-time until about two months before the hearing when she returned to 
fulltime employment. In 2006 or 2007, he also incurred about $20,000 in legal fees 
during a child custody dispute. These were conditions beyond his control that 
contributed to his financial problems. To merit full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), an applicant 
not only must encounter conditions beyond his or her control, but also must act 
responsibly under the circumstances. In this case, Applicant hired an attorney and 
disputed the largest debt, SOR ¶ 1.c, which resulted in the deletion of that debt from his 
credit report. During an OPM interview in March 2011, he was questioned about the 
debts and stated he intended to set up payment arrangements for all of his delinquent 
debts within the next couple of days because he and his wife were in position to begin 
paying them again. He, however, provided no proof of payments toward the remaining 
debts alleged in the SOR. He also presented no realistic plan for resolving them. Based 
on the record evidence, I am unable to find that his financial problems are under control 
or are being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served honorably in the Marine Corps during Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
Nonetheless, he provided no proof of payments toward his delinquent debts or any 
meaningful plan for resolving them. Insufficient evidence has been presented to 
establish that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
