 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 11-07169 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 22, 2011, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On December 3, 2012, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 29, 2013. Applicant requested 
her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On May 10, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on May 21, 2013. She was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on June 7, 2013. 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
expired on July 7, 2013. I received the case assignment on July 25, 2013. Based upon 
a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.f to 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 
1.o to 1.r, and 1.t. She denied Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.e, 1.j, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.s. (Item 3)  
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. She is currently married to her second husband. She 
has one child with her first husband. The son is 23 years of age. She also has a 33-
year-old daughter. Applicant works for a defense contractor in its warehouse. She has a 
security clearance and is seeking a renewal of that clearance. (Items 4 and 9)  
 
 Applicant owes money on 20 delinquent debts identified in the SOR, some dating 
to 2006. The majority have been delinquent since 2010. She admits owing 13 debts with 
a total of $35,867.07. She denies owing seven debts that total $3,974.38. Applicant did 
not submit any documents showing she disputed any debts other than her answers to 
several written interrogatories, in which she denied owing several telecommunications 
companies any money and thought her identity was stolen. Applicant also claims to be 
paying six delinquent debts, those listed in Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.h, 1.i or 1.q, 1.k, and 
1.p, plus an unlisted debt to a home improvement store. These debts total $27,612.69. 
Applicant also claims to pay $200 monthly on the $4,311.38 debt listed in Subparagraph 
1.g owed to a bank. However, she did not attach any documents to show the current 
status of any of these installment payment plans. (Items 5-9) 
 
 Applicant owes the U.S. Government $542 for 2008 income taxes. Her Answer 
states she is paying the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $100 monthly on 2010 taxes 
but does not state the amount owed. She claims the 2008 taxes are settled, but does 
not provide any documentation concerning the settlement amount or why the taxes 
were unpaid originally. (Items 5-9) 
 
 Applicant claims unemployment from December 2007 to July 2008, and from 
November 2009 to May 2010, caused her financial difficulties. These periods total about 
15 months in the past 10 years. Her credit reports show a large number of credit-card 
transactions and other financial borrowings (62) during the same time period. Her April 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
2011 credit report contains 23 pages of activity, including charged off and paid debts. It 
also contains four collection actions with balances of about $15,000. (Items 5-9) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any information containing efforts at financial counseling 
or budgeting to resolve her delinquent debts. Her May 2012 interrogatories answers 
assert she would pay the debts listed in Subparagraphs 1.s, 1.f or 1.r, and 1.o by May 
or July of 2012, but she did not do so because the debts continue to be listed in the 
credit reports and on the SOR.  
    
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, three conditions are applicable to the 
facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, high debt to income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.  
 
 From 2006 to the present, Applicant accumulated 20 delinquent debts, totaling 
$39,841.45 that remain unpaid or unresolved. Applicant admitted 13 delinquent debts 
totaling $35,867.07 and denied 7 debts in the amount of $3,974.38.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three mitigating conditions might have partial 
applicability: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on her ability to repay her debts. In the past 12 years, 
Applicant has been unemployed only 15 months. Applicant did not demonstrate she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. She failed to meet her burden of proof on 
that issue and it does not apply. 
 
Applicant claims to be paying six delinquent debts on the installment plan. 
However, any information she attached to her Answer or her interrogatories is dated in 
2012, so the current status of these efforts cannot be determined in a definitive manner. 
Again, she failed to meet her burden of proof on that issue and AG ¶ 20 (d) does not 
apply.  
 
Applicant failed to prove AG ¶ 20 (c) applied because she did not submit 
sufficient evidence that she acted responsibly in resolving her delinquent debts during 
the time the debts were accumulating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She has not taken sufficient and continuous action to resolve her 
delinquent debts. This inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress based on the magnitude of her financial obligation. Applicant’s list of debts, 
including successful repayments of many obligations, shows a lack of restraint in 
monetary expenditures over time. The money spent in the past on a variety of credit 
cards could have paid the debts that are now delinquent. These actions show both a 
lack of planning, or an ability to live within Applicant’s means, which are necessary for 
successful financial management. Her lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. Applicant’s spending history shows a pattern that caused her 
present financial situation. Her actions will continue based on her past performance. 
Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, she exhibited a 
continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on a significant 
number of her delinquent debts during the past seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
           Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.t:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
