 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----- )  ISCR Case No. 11-09595 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption, drug 
involvement, and psychological conditions. Eligibility for a security clearance and 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 13, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On an unspecified date, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on September 
26, 2012.2 On March 5, 2013, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,3 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (SF 86, dated April 13, 2011). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 26, 2012). 
 
3
 It appears that an earlier version of the SOR, dated February 27, 2013, signed by the same personnel 
security specialist as the March 2013 version, was prepared and placed in the correspondence file portion of the case 
file submitted to me when the case was assigned. While the versions are similar, there are substantial differences. 
There is no evidence that the document was ever actually sent to Applicant, and he never received that version of the 
SOR.  
 
2 
                                      
 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption), H (Drug Involvement), and I (Psychological Conditions), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 21, 2013. In a sworn statement, dated 
April 4, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed on May 30, 2013. The case was assigned to me on June 5, 2013. 
A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 7, 2013, and I convened the hearing, as 
scheduled, on June 25, 2013.  
 
During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
was received on July 8, 2013. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement 
it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity. He submitted 17 documents which were 
marked as Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE Q) and admitted into evidence as 
without objection. The record closed on July 8, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR under alcohol consumption (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.) and one factual allegation under 
drug involvement (¶ 2.b.). He admitted portions of other factual allegations under drug 
involvement (¶¶ 2.a., 2.c., and 2.d.), as well as a portion of an allegation under 
psychological conditions (¶ 3.b.). He denied the remaining allegations. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a sheet metal technician with his current employer since February 2011. He 
was previously employed as a sheet metal mechanic, and aircraft mechanic.4 He was 
unemployed from February 2010 until February 2011, and from October 2009 until 
February 2010, he was a full-time care giver for his terminally ill parents.5 Applicant 
                                                          
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17, 20-21. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18-19, 51, 54-55. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
never served in the U.S. military,6 and never held a security clearance.7 He graduated 
from high school in May 1981, and attended college for about six months. Applicant was 
married the first time (to a binge drinker) in June 1996, and divorced in May 2001. He 
married his current wife (a heavy drinker with bipolar disorder) in March 2004. They 
separated in May 2013.8 
 
Alcohol Consumption & Drug Involvement  
 
Applicant was a substance abuser whose substances of choice were alcohol and 
several illegal drugs, including marijuana, as well as a variety of prescription drugs, 
including opiates (methadone, hydrocodone, and oxycodone (also known as 
OxyContin®), and Xanax®. His use of alcohol resulted in six incidents involving the 
police and judicial authorities. He was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI) in 1988, on two occasions in 1992, and once in 2009; arrested for public 
intoxication in 2000; and arrested for strangulation – domestic abuse in 2009. The 2009 
incident also involved an arrest and charge for possession of marijuana.9 
 
He began consuming alcohol with friends at bars and at home when he was 16 
years old. From that point until he was about 20 years old, he consumed two to three 
beers at a time once each month. His alcohol consumption increased to two beers 
every day and to the point of intoxication every weekend. There were periods when he 
would quit drinking for weeks or months at a time, only to return to binge drinking on 
weekends. At one point in 2000, after consuming 14 glasses of wine and a little liquor, 
blacking out, and attempting to commit suicide by cutting his throat,10 he decided to stop 
consuming alcohol. His abstinence was sustained until 2006. Starting in 2006, he 
resumed his alcohol consumption, going to bars three times per week for three or four 
beers and mixed drinks each time. In December 2008, the quantity increased to six 
beers per night with at least 10 to 14 beers and 3 to 4 shots each day on the weekends. 
In June 2009, Applicant’s consumption decreased to about 12 beers, with no more than 
2 at a time.11 He took his last drink on February 11, 2010, and has been abstinent since 
that time.12 
 
Although Applicant was unable to quantify the amount of alcohol it might take to 
make him intoxicated, he acknowledged that each time he consumed alcohol it was with 
the intent of becoming intoxicated.13 Alcohol made him mellow, and caused him to black 
                                                          
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 23. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 37.  
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 24-26; Tr. at 52, 55; Tr. at 31-32.  
 
9
 GE 3 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated April 29, 2011). 
 
10
 Tr. at 42. 
 
11
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated May 24, 2011), at 4-5. 
 
12
 Tr. at 46. 
 
13
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 5. 
 
4 
                                      
 
out. He admits he has a problem with alcohol. He no longer has any desire to consume 
it.14  
 
Applicant first smoked marijuana when he was 10 years old.15 He continued 
using marijuana throughout his teenage years.16 By December 2008, he was taking two 
to three puffs from marijuana cigarettes or a marijuana pipe at bars with friends.17 In 
2004, Applicant, referring to the period before 2000, said he would “smoke marijuana 
daily if it was available,” and added that he “thought of moving out of the country so that 
he could smoke marijuana legally,” something he now considers to be ridiculous.18 
Applicant used the marijuana because he believed it helped his back (he sustained a 
herniated disc in 1997) and knee pain. He never sold, supplied, manufactured, or grew 
marijuana, and never flunked any of the many random drug tests that were 
administered to him.19 Applicant stopped using marijuana in October 2004, but resumed 
smoking it in November or December 2008.20 Applicant stopped using marijuana in 
February 2009, following his arrest, and he has abstained from marijuana use since that 
time.21 
 
At some point in his life, for an unspecified period of time before February 2004, 
Applicant experimented with illegal drugs, including lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD); 
MDMA (3, 4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine), known as ecstasy; crystal meth; 
and cocaine.22 The quantity and frequency of such use has not been described.  
 
During the period from August 2003 until June 2004, a physician prescribed 
Xanax® and Prozac® to treat Applicant’s anxiety and depression, and hydrocodone, 
oxycodone, and Percocet®, a combination of acetaminophen and oxycodone, to 
alleviate his back and knee pain.23 When his prescriptions expired, Applicant self-
medicated by either purchasing the drugs from a coworker or obtaining them from 
friends who no longer needed their own prescribed drugs. He continued to use the 
drugs as originally prescribed for him to alleviate his psychological and physical 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
14
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 5. 
 
15
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 3. 
 
16
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 3. 
 
17
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 5-6. 
 
18
 GE 4 (Medical Records – Discharge Summary, dated October 8, 2004), at 1; Tr. at 65-67. 
 
19
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 6; Tr. at 33, 66. 
 
20
 Tr. at 70-71. 
 
21
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 6. 
 
22
 GE 2 (Medical Records – Addiction Recovery Programs Patient Profile, dated August 2, 2004); Tr. at 73-
74. 
 
23
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 6; Tr. at 36, 43-44. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
problems.24 He never sold, supplied, or manufactured, any of the drugs he used. 
Applicant stopped using the illegal drugs other than marijuana before February 2004, 
and, with the exception of drugs that were prescribed for him, he stopped using or 
misusing all other prescription drugs in August 2004. Instead, he started using Aleve® 
to handle the remaining pain.25 
 
Applicant’s abuse of alcohol and drugs resulted in several episodes of treatment, 
education, or aftercare. Following his 1988 alcohol-related arrest, Applicant complied 
with the court mandate that he attend 15 meetings of Alcohol Anonymous (AA).26 
Following his alcohol-related 2000 arrest, Applicant started to attend periodic meetings 
of AA because he was concerned about his black out and his suicide attempt.27 It is 
unclear just how long he continued to do so. In September 2000, Applicant underwent a 
28 day alcohol-related substance abuse therapy program.28  
 
In August 2004, concerned about his substance abuse, inability to concentrate at 
work, and “sick of drugs,” Applicant enrolled in a 19-day inpatient program, followed by 
90-day outpatient substance abuse program at the local medical center. Because of his 
polysubstance abuse, he was administered phenobarbital for seven days. He was 
treated by a team consisting of a doctor of medicine (M.D.), a doctor of osteopathic 
medicine (D.O.), a program manager with a master’s degree, and a substance abuse 
counselor who is a Master’s Level Addiction Professional (MLAP). No psychological 
testing was performed, no psychiatric consultations were requested, and no 
recommendations were made.29  
 
The discharge diagnoses were as follows: Axis I, polysubstance dependence & 
major depressive disorder (MDD); Axis II, deferred; Axis III, none; Axis IV, moderate; 
and Axis V, Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) 70.30 There was no prognosis 
made. Applicant was discharged from the program in October 2004 with 
recommendations to attend at least three 12-step meetings per week; maintain a 
working relationship with a sponsor; participate in continuing care on a weekly basis; 
                                                          
24
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 6. 
 
25
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 6; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 14, at 3; Tr. at 39-40, 59-60. 
 
26
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
27
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 4. 
 
28
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 9. 
 
29
 GE 4, supra note 18. 
 
30
 GE 4, supra note 18; Tr. at 37-38. The diagnosis of polysubstance dependence is reserved for behavior 
during the same 12-month period in which an individual repeatedly used at least three groups of substances, but no 
single substance predominated. In this instance, possible groups of substances that Applicant admitted using include 
alcohol, marijuana, cocaine, hallucinogens, opioids, etc. In those situations where there are problems associated with 
multiple drugs and the criteria are met for more than one specific substance-related disorder (e.g., alcohol 
dependence and marijuana dependence), each diagnosis should be made. See, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders Fourth Edition Revised (DSM-IV-TR), at 293-294.  
 
 
6 
                                      
 
and participate in individual/family therapy.31 It is unclear how long Applicant complied 
with the recommendations. 
 
As noted above, Applicant resumed his consumption of alcohol in 2006, and his 
use of marijuana in November or December 2008, long after his 2004 discharge from 
the outpatient substance abuse program. In 2009, after his DUI/marijuana arrest, he 
was ordered to attend an alcohol awareness class and attend counseling.32 He 
complied with the order and in May 2009, he started 20 hours of alcohol and drug 
education, along with 24 hours of cognitive/behavioral group therapy. He underwent five 
urine analyses, all of which were negative for alcohol or illegal substances. Applicant 
successfully completed his treatment program on July 27, 2009.33 He resumed his 
attendance at AA meetings, is in the 12-step program, currently attends one or two 
meetings per week, and meets with his sponsor at least once each week when he is in 
town, or they speak by phone when he is out of town.34  
 
Psychological Conditions 
 
As noted above, when Applicant was discharged from the 90-day outpatient 
substance abuse program in October 2004, no Axis II personality disorders were noted 
or diagnosed, and the report simply said “deferred.” In 2009, he started 20 hours of 
alcohol and drug education, along with 24 hours of cognitive/behavioral group therapy. 
 
  The SOR, as amended, alleged that Applicant was not compliant with his 
prescribed medication following his suicidal attempt in 2000. While there is evidence 
that Applicant had experimented with a variety of illegal drugs and self-medicated with 
other prescription drugs, there is little evidence that Applicant failed to comply with any 
prescribed medication for his depression. The self-medication was primarily to control 
pain, and not to alleviate anxiety or depression. Department Counsel conceded, and I 
concur, that Applicant’s suicidal attempt or gesture was alcohol-induced rather than an 
action brought about by a significant psychological defect or deficit.35 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant’s work performance appraisals from his employers over an extensive 
period generally reflected an individual whose overall performance exceeds 
expectations.36 Among the additional comments appearing in those performance 
                                                          
31
 GE 4, supra note 18. 
 
32
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 2. 
 
33
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 3; GE 2, supra note 2, at 11; GE 2, supra note 11, at 3; 
GE 5 (Treatment Summary, undated). It should be noted that the Treatment Summary indicated that Applicant 
completed his program in 2012, but Applicant and the evidence support an ending date of 2009. 
 
34
 Tr. at 46-48; GE 2, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
35
 Tr. at 79-80. 
 
36
 AE C (90 Day Review, dated June 2, 2011); AE D (Annual Performance Review, dated February 23, 
2012); AE H (Inter-Crew Transfer, dated June 15, 1990); AE I (Performance Appraisal, dated September 12, 1993); 
 
7 
                                      
 
appraisals were the following: “He is reliable in every respect;”37 “He is a team player, 
fiercefully loyal and dedicated to his job and the company. He can always be counted 
on no matter what the situation is;”38 and “His work ethic is above reproach.”39 Various 
program managers and supervisors were effusive with praise for Applicant’s efforts, 
significant contributions, willingness to assume responsibility, excellent work ethic, 
professionalism, high motivation, dedication, organization, technical expertise, and 
personal leadership.40  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”41 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”42   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
AE J (Performance Appraisal, dated September 12, 1992); AE K (Performance Appraisal, dated September 12, 
1994); AE L (Performance Appraisal, dated September 12, 1994); AE M (Performance Appraisal, dated September 
12, 1995); AE N (Performance Appraisal, dated June 21, 1996). 
 
37
 AE M, supra note 36, at 2. 
 
38
 AE J, supra note 36, at 2. 
 
39
 AE H, supra note 36, at 2. 
 
40
 AE A (Character Reference, undated); AE B (Character Reference, undated); AE F (Letter, dated July 14, 
1998); AE G (Letter, dated May 20, 1993); AE O (Character Reference, undated). 
 
41
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
42
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”43 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.44  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”45 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”46 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
43
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
44
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
45
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
46
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent is potentially disqualifying. In addition, habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, may apply under AG ¶ 22(c).  
Similarly, a diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence is of security 
significance under AG ¶ 22(d). Additionally, an evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 22(e). Also, AG ¶ 22(f) 
may apply if there is a relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.  
 
AG ¶ 22(a) has been established by Applicant’s six alcohol-related incidents 
involving the police and judicial authorities. AG ¶ 22(c) has been established because 
Applicant repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, intoxication, 
and blackout. AG ¶ 22(f) has been established by Applicant’s continued use of alcohol 
after completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. AG ¶ 22(e) has not been 
established. While there may be a diagnosis that includes alcohol dependence, there is 
no evidence that a separate evaluation was ever made. In this regard, AG ¶ 22(d) has 
been partially established as the record is significantly silent regarding a specific 
diagnosis of “alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” referring only to “polysubstance 
dependence.” 
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Similarly, when the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser), AG ¶ 23(b) may apply. In addition, AG ¶ 23(d) may apply if: 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
AG ¶ 23(b) applies. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(d) partially apply. For a number of years, 
Applicant simply ignored his alcohol problems. He consumed alcohol with friends and 
his two wives with the intent of becoming intoxicated. It made him mellow. It also 
resulted in a variety of alcohol-related incidents and involvement with police and judicial 
authorities, costing him fines, the loss of his operator’s license, brief periods of 
detention, and both voluntary and mandatory attendance at several alcohol-related 
treatment, education, and aftercare programs. It resulted in black outs and a suicide 
attempt or gesture. 
 
In September 2000, Applicant underwent a 28-day alcohol-related substance 
abuse therapy program. But he continued to drink. Following his inpatient and outpatient 
treatment in 2004, Applicant abstained from further alcohol consumption until 2006, 
when he resumed his drinking. Following his arrest in 2009, Applicant completed 20 
hours of alcohol and drug education, along with 24 hours of cognitive/behavioral group 
therapy. Something finally clicked, and on February 11, 2010, Applicant decided that 
alcohol was bad for him. He has been abstinent since that day. He resumed his 
attendance at AA meetings and currently attends one or two meetings per week, and 
meets or speaks with his sponsor at least once each week.  
 
Applicant has been consistently candid about the significance of alcohol in his 
life. He was forthright in his estimations about the frequency and quantity of his alcohol 
consumption, and has not attempted to minimize his problem. While Applicant was, at 
times, initially unwilling or unable to curtail his alcohol consumption, there were also 
periods when he was able to do so. Applicant experienced slips and relapses following 
various alcohol treatment programs. As such, his conduct demonstrated a lack of 
judgment and/or a failure to control impulses which is inconsistent with the holder of a 
security clearance. It is significant that a separate diagnosis of alcohol dependence was 
not made under Axis I when Applicant was diagnosed with polysubstance dependence. 
This seemingly indicates that his alcohol issues were insufficient to meet the criteria for 
the alcohol-related disorders. I acknowledge that Applicant abstained from alcohol from 
late 2004 until 2006, before resuming his consumption of alcohol. This time, however, 
his abstinence since February 2010 is accompanied by the abstinence from drugs as 
well as his new conviction and intention to remain abstinent from all the substances with 
which he had problems. Applicant’s three-and-one-half years of abstinence is viewed 
favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue it and aftercare treatment. 
Applicant has furnished substantial evidence of positive actions taken to overcome his 
alcohol problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence that enables me to 
conclude that his alcohol problem has been put behind him and will not recur. 
 
11 
                                      
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), any drug abuse (see above definition), is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, 
under AG ¶ 25(c), illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, may 
raise security concerns. Also, where there is a diagnosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug 
dependence, AG ¶ 25(d) may apply. In addition, AG ¶ 25(e) may apply where there is 
an evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social worker 
who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program.  
 
Applicant’s use of drugs actually consists of two separate types of drug use. He 
used illegal drugs and he misused prescription drugs. Applicant routinely purchased and 
used marijuana, but he never sold, supplied, or manufactured it. He also experimented 
with LSD, ecstasy, crystal meth, and cocaine. When his prescriptions for hydrocodone, 
oxycodone, and Percocet® expired, Applicant self-medicated by purchasing the drugs 
from a coworker or friends. He never sold, supplied, or manufactured, any of the drugs 
he used. Applicant’s abuse of marijuana resulted in one arrest for possession of 
marijuana and several substance abuse treatment or aftercare programs. He was 
diagnosed with polysubstance dependence by a duly qualified medical professional. AG 
¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(d) have been established. AG ¶ 25(e) has not been established. 
While there may be a diagnosis that includes polysubstance dependence, there is no 
evidence that a separate evaluation was ever made.   
 
12 
                                      
 
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. 
When the abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness during 
which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended, AG ¶ 26(c) may apply. 
In addition, AG ¶ 26(d) may apply where there is satisfactory completion of a prescribed 
drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional. 
AG ¶¶ 26(b), 26(c), and 26(d) apply. AG ¶ 26(a) does do not apply. Applicant’s 
experimentation with LSD, ecstasy, crystal meth, and cocaine, ceased well before 
February 2004, and has not subsequently been repeated. His abuse of marijuana over 
a lengthy period of years finally ceased in February 2009, and he has abstained for the 
four and one-half years since then. His misuse, or unauthorized continued use, of the 
prescription drugs hydrocodone, oxycodone, and Percocet® after his prescriptions 
expired, ceased in August 2004. Applicant self-medicated using those pain killers to 
alleviate his back and knee pains. The eventual cumulative success of his inpatient, 
outpatient, and aftercare treatment, his new outlook regarding substance abuse, along 
with his continuing active and frequent participation in AA, and his period of sustained 
abstinence from any of the drugs, reflect Applicant’s substantial efforts to demonstrate 
an intention not to abuse any drugs in the future. Applicant’s drug abuse or misuse is 
unlikely to continue or recur, and no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Psychological Conditions is set 
forth in AG ¶ 27: 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
 
13 
                                      
 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 28(a), behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to 
emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior, 
may raise security concerns. Similarly, where the individual has failed to follow 
treatment advice related to a diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, 
e.g., failure to take prescribed medication, AG ¶ 28(c) might apply. There is a diagnosis 
that includes MDD, but that diagnosis is not based on any psychological testing or 
psychiatric consultations, and no recommendations were made. There is also evidence 
that at some point before 2004, an unidentified physician prescribed Xanax and Prozac 
to treat Applicant’s anxiety and depression. AG ¶ 28(a) minimally applies. Although the 
SOR alleged the failure to follow treatment advice related to his diagnosed emotional, 
mental, or personality condition, there is no evidence to support the allegations. AG ¶ 
28(c) has not been established. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from psychological conditions. If the identified condition is readily 
controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent 
compliance with the treatment plan, AG ¶ 29(a) might apply. Under AG ¶ 29(b), it is 
potentially mitigating where the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or 
treatment program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified mental health professional. In addition, AG ¶ 29(e) may apply if there is no 
indication of a current problem. 
AG ¶¶ 29(a) and 29(b) partially apply, and AG ¶ 29(e) applies.  In this instance, 
Applicant’s anxiety and depression were apparently controlled by Xanax and Prozac, 
and no recommendations were made regarding his MDD when he completed the 2004 
treatment programs that he had voluntarily entered. No continuing treatment plan was 
established for his MDD. Other than Applicant’s polysubstance dependence, there is no 
evidence of any abnormal behavior or poor work performance. To the contrary, even 
with his anxiety, depression, and MDD, Applicant’s work performance remained 
outstanding. His conditions are seemingly treatable and controllable if he takes his 
prescribed medications. Moreover, with the reduction of several of the stressors in his 
life, including his continuing abstinence from alcohol and drugs, and the continued 
separation from his wife, with his medications, Applicant’s judgment will no longer be 
impaired, and his condition will be under control. There is no evidence of a continuing or 
current problem. 
 
  
 
14 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G, H, and I, in my analysis below.      
 
There is substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. Applicant was a 
polysubstance abuser, diagnosed with polysubstance dependence, who experimented 
with LSD, ecstasy, crystal meth, and cocaine; routinely abused marijuana; self-
medicated by purchasing and using hydrocodone, oxycodone, and Percocet®, when his 
own prescriptions expired; and consumed alcohol to the point of impairment, 
intoxication, and black out. The combination of his conditions caused him to make a 
suicide attempt or gesture in 2000. Applicant’s abuse of alcohol and marijuana resulted 
in six incidents involving the police and judicial authorities. It also resulted in several 
treatment, education, or aftercare programs. There were several episodes of slips and 
relapses after completing treatment, education, or aftercare programs. 
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. His 
experimentation with LSD, ecstasy, crystal meth, and cocaine, ceased well before 
February 2004; his misuse, or unauthorized continued use, of the prescription drugs 
hydrocodone, oxycodone, and Percocet®, ceased in August 2004; his abuse of 
marijuana finally ceased in February 2009, and he has abstained for the four and one-
half years since then; his alcohol consumption ceased on February 11, 2010, and he 
has been abstinent since that day. He has not made a suicide attempt or gesture since 
2000. After building on what he learned during his inpatient, outpatient, education, and 
aftercare programs, Applicant resumed his attendance at AA meetings. As noted above, 
Applicant’s lengthy periods of alcohol and drug abstinence are viewed favorably, and he 
should be encouraged to continue them and his aftercare treatment. Applicant furnished 
substantial evidence of positive actions taken to overcome his polysubstance 
dependence for both drugs and alcohol, and has established a pattern of abstinence 
that enables me to conclude that his substance abuse problems, whether they be 
alcohol or drugs, have been put behind him and will not recur. 
 
15 
                                      
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.47 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. This decision should serve as a warning that his 
failure to continue his abstinence from alcohol and drugs will adversely affect his future 
eligibility for a security clearance.48 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the alcohol consumption, drug involvement, and 
psychological conditions security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
                                                          
47
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
48
 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant, the decision, including the warning, should not 
be interpreted as being contingent on future monitoring of Applicant’s alcohol and drug abstinence. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) has no authority to attach conditions to an applicant’s security clearance. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-26686 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-04302 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-17410 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline I:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
