 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-07188 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the eight allegations 
raised and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned 
to me on April 2, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on April 17, 2013, setting the hearing for May 7, 2013. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1-3. They were 
 
2 
 
 
accepted without objection. Applicant offered testimony and the hearing was adjourned. 
On May 20, 2013, the Government forwarded additional materials from Applicant 
without objection. They were accepted into the record as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The 
transcript (Tr.) was delayed until July 12, 2013.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old senior software systems engineer who has worked for 
his present employer for about seven years. He has maintained a security clearance 
without incident for over eight years. He attended college for about a year-and-a-half. 
He then earned certification in programming before he chose his present field of work. 
Applicant is married. He and his wife have four children, ranging in age from 10 to 15.  
  
 In about September 2003, Applicant was charged with second degree assault 
against his wife after an argument over how to best discipline their eldest child. His wife 
tried to bar Applicant from leaving the house; Applicant pushed her out of the way so he 
could exit and have a private talk with their child. Applicant’s wife fell over a chair. 
Applicant and the child left for a talk. They were met by the police on their return. The 
argument was discussed and Applicant was charged. Applicant’s wife declined to testify 
and Applicant was found not guilty. The couple received counseling. Applicant learned 
how to “diffuse emotional anger.” (Tr. 17) There have not been any repeats of this sort 
of behavior. (Tr. 17)   
 
 At some point in 2007, Applicant was issued a ticket, which he gave to his wife to 
pay. His wife managed the family accounts. (Tr. 20) She failed to pay the ticket. In about 
March 2008, Applicant was charged with exceeding the speed limit and, as a result of 
the unpaid ticket, driving on a suspended license. (Tr. 18) Applicant had the court date 
incorrect and did not go at the appointed time. He was later charged with failure to 
appear and was arrested in about November 2008 on a bench warrant. He pled guilty to 
driving on a suspended license and was granted probation before judgment plus fines 
and costs. The unpaid ticket causing the suspension to be invoked was paid and his 
driver’s license reinstated. Applicant completed five years of probation early, in July 
2013.   
 
 In 2009, Applicant had a tedious commute to work. It included a long stretch of 
roadway with no lights. At some point, traffic begins to move faster as the long open 
stretch drags on. Applicant would often find himself driving above the legal limit, at 
speeds between 60 and 65 miles per hour or over, as if he had been on a highway. (Tr. 
28-29, 58-59) As a result, in about September 2009, Applicant was charged with 
exceeding the maximum speed limit. He was similarly charged again in December 
2009. He was found guilty both times and fined. He now appreciates the importance of 
maintaining and using a working speed control function on his car. 
 
After his 2009 speeding tickets, Applicant was found guilty in June 2011 of 
driving on a suspended registration. It had been suspended for failure to timely 
 
3 
 
 
complete a supplemental emissions test. He paid the fine and immediately had the 
emissions test conducted once he discovered his registration had been suspended. 
 
In 2010, Applicant used his corporate credit card to try to purchase about $300 of 
merchandise at a sporting goods store. He thought the purchase would be approved 
because he had previously charged gasoline on the card and promptly paid for the 
charge without objection. He did not see a problem with this practice since he took 
responsibility for the charge, and he did not think to directly ask his employer if he could 
make such charges. In this case, the purchase was declined and the incident was 
reported to his employer. Applicant was counseled and his corporate card was closed.  
 
In December 2010, Applicant walked into his bank branch and saw a teller he 
knew from numerous past transactions. (Tr. 34-35) The teller looked bored and 
Applicant was in a playful mood. Thinking they would both get “a giggle out of it” (Tr. 
34), he wrote a note saying she should give him all her money. He then stepped out of 
line to give her the message. (Tr. 35) The woman said, “yeah, right.” (Tr. 35) They 
shared a laugh together, then he returned to the line. Once he was at the front of the 
line, he gave her his deposit and they chatted. He extended a holiday greeting. She 
made a comment advising him that he probably should not have passed her the note. 
He apologized, noting he was just trying to cheer her.  
 
Later at home, Applicant got a call from the sheriff, who asked if Applicant could 
be interviewed about something. Applicant met with a detective, who eventually asked 
him about the bank incident. Applicant insisted he had only meant to humor the teller. 
The detective concluded that it was a simple lapse of judgment. A few weeks later, the 
detective called him to advise that the bank wished to have him charged with robbery. 
He was not detained or jailed, but was required to appear in court when charged. 
Ultimately, Applicant was found not guilty of attempted theft and a robbery charge was 
not prosecuted. (Tr. 41)   
 
In October 2011, because Applicant’s wife had not given him the appropriate 
sticker to update his vehicle’s license plate, Applicant was cited and charged for 
displaying an expired registration plate. Applicant immediately rectified the situation by 
paying the fine. Applicant has since begun to review the mail himself. (Tr. 45-47) 
Moreover, in order to make sure he does not miss important dates in the future, he uses 
a cellular telephone with a calendar function to help keep him organized. (Tr. 24) 
 
Nearing 40 years of age, the incidents described above are the only negative 
instances of employee rules, personal or criminal misconduct, or questionable 
judgment. (Tr. 56-57) He takes full responsibility for his actions. Having taken control of 
the mail and by using his phone as a reminder tool, Applicant has made changes to 
avoid repeating traffic and vehicular violations as the ones noted above. With regard to 
his misuse of a corporate credit card and the bank incident, he has learned to contain 
his natural effusiveness and give more thought to comporting his behavior to each 
situation. Applicant is “keenly aware” of the importance of better controlling his conduct, 
especially since his work depends on his maintaining a security clearance. (Tr. 52, 55) 
 
4 
 
 
He is committed to his job, where he genuinely enjoys both the work and his peers. He 
does not want to risk losing that job. Similarly, he will do nothing to jeopardize his 
family’s financial well-being. (Tr. 52-53) He now has a better understanding of the trust 
expected of one who possesses a security clearance and appreciates that degree of 
trust. (Tr. 54) He is committed to doing whatever it takes to ensure that the government 
can trust him. (Tr. 54) He has had no behavioral lapses since 2011.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
Applicant has raised issues related to personal conduct in several different 
contexts. While traffic tickets and registration issues generally do not play heavily into 
this process, here, they represent a 2009 to 2011 period of disregard for the rules of the 
road. He was found not guilty of assault and the resultant marital counseling proved to 
be productive. The misuse of a corporate credit card did not indicate a criminal intent, 
but did show poor judgment. His “joke” with a bank teller similarly showed poor 
judgment given the context. Taken together, there is a pattern of small failures to follow 
through with rules and regulations that has created concern. Under these 
circumstances, the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information);  
 
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicting that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations); and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, 
such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing). 
 
6 
 
 
At first blush, the collection of admitted allegations in this case represents a 
whole consisting of a hodgepodge of examples of unreliable conduct or an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. At heart, however, they remain, for 
the most part, fundamentally minor or isolated and singular incidents for which Applicant 
has already made restitution, timely rectified the situation, or taken corrective action. He 
received productive counseling regarding his early domestic incident and his 
unintentional misuse of his corporate credit card. He has seized personal control of all 
aspects related to his driving and vehicle registration with the help of cell phone 
reminders and personal monitoring of correspondence. He intends to use speed control 
to help him monitor his pace during his commute. He has clearly learned to better 
comport his behavior after his inappropriate joke with his bank teller; indeed, the bank 
situation has given him genuine pause to consider his behavior in context.   
 
Each of these incidents proved to be a teachable moment from which Applicant 
has learned and used as the basis for taking corrective action in his life. His most recent 
infraction, failing to timely apply a sticker to his license plate to update its expiration, 
occurred nearly two years ago. He has had no additional infractions or personal conduct 
issues since. He is genuinely contrite and embarrassed about these incidents. I have no 
concerns that Applicant will fail to continue self-monitoring his behavior and comporting 
his behavior as appropriate. Taken as a whole, I find that AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old senior software systems engineer who has worked 
without adverse incident for his present employer for seven years. He was a credible 
and outgoing witness. He has attended some college courses and completed 
certification in programming before he chose his present field of work. Applicant is 
married and has four children. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Over the past decade, Applicant was charged with domestic assault, but found 
not guilty. He and his wife received counseling. No subsequent domestic or anger-
related incidents have arisen. Today, they are still together working to raise their family. 
Applicant received more than one speeding ticket and administrative charges related to 
his driving privilege, such as a suspended or revoked license based on an oversight. All 
such charges were timely rectified. Counseling advised him how to use a corporate 
credit card in a manner not previously discussed. Finally, there is the most egregious 
violation – the bank incident. Applicant was highly credible in his depiction of it as a 
joke. Apparently, others concurred as he was found not guilty of the attempted theft 
charge and the robbery charge was nolled.  
 
Overall, Applicant’s 30s served as a learning process for a case of delayed 
maturation. Most importantly, Applicant demonstrated through his testimony, demeanor, 
and acts that he has learned from each of these admitted instances of poor personal 
conduct. He is clearly committed to comporting his behavior appropriately in the future. 
There is no evidence he has ever compromised security at work. He has been incident 
free in his personal life for two years. I am convinced that Applicant will henceforth 
monitor his behavior and conduct himself appropriately. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the personal conduct 
guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
