 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 11-03110 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He has addressed 12 of the 13 
collection accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). He has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concern. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 7, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On February 25, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested 
a hearing. On May 15, 2013, I was assigned the case. On May 31, 2013, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
convened on June 11, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 7 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through J, without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. Additional 
material (Ex. K through Ex. Q) was submitted and admitted into the record without 
objection. On June 19, 2013, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts at SOR 1.g. ($100) 
and SOR 1.j ($583) and admitted the remaining collection accounts. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old senior support technician who has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2005, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. 
(Ex. 1, Tr. 14) In 2000, he joined the U.S Army and in 2004, he separated as a sergeant 
(E-5). (Tr. 28) While serving in the Army, he received a certificate of achievement, a 
Good Conduct Medal, and an Army Achievement Medal. (Ex. O) He has received three 
achievement awards for exceptional performance and outstanding contributions at his 
current job. (Ex. Q) While in the Army, he married and his wife had a son from a prior 
marriage. (Tr. 28)  
 
After leaving the Army, Applicant’s employment and his increased living 
expenses caused him financial difficulties. Applicant’s first job after leaving the Army 
paid him $1,200 to $1,300 per month. (Tr. 30) In February 2005, he and his wife 
separated. (Tr. 31, 43) In 2006, his debts were combined into a $10,000 loan with $135 
monthly payments. (Ex. 2) He has paid or addressed all of the SOR debts except for the 
vehicle repossession (SOR 1.l, $10,022) (Tr. 18)  
 
In September 2003, Applicant purchased a 2000 car with monthly payments of 
$300. (Ex. 4, Tr. 53) His June 2011 credit report shows 24 payments were made on the 
vehicle. (Ex. 5) He made his monthly payments until 2005, when he voluntarily returned 
the vehicle. After being repossessed, the vehicle was sold, but the amount owed did not 
decrease from the $10,022 (SOR 1.l) that was owed on the vehicle prior its 
repossession. (Tr. 32) In August 2011, he stated he would contact the bank and 
determine what was still owed on the car loan and resolve it as soon as possible. (Ex. 2) 
He has yet to work out a repayment agreement with the creditor. (Tr. 53, 54) It was his 
intention to pay his other debts before addressing this debt, the largest of his collection 
accounts. (Tr. 66, 67) 
 
In August 2011, Applicant was asked about his finances during a personal 
subject interview. (Ex. 2) At that time, he had not had any financial counseling, but was 
meeting his current financial obligations. (Ex. 2) In September 2012, he completed 
written financial interrogatories. At that time, his net monthly income was $2,452 and his 
monthly expenses were $1,177, which left a net monthly reminder of $1,275. (Ex. 3) He 
had debts, but was not making payments on them.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
Applicant paid three utility collection accounts (SOR 1.b, $275; SOR 1.c, $965; 
SOR 1.k, $98). In June 2012, he started making $200 monthly payments on the 
accounts and in April 2013, made a $740 payment. (Ex. A, Ex. B) The utility company 
listed in SOR 1.b was purchased by the utility company listed in SOR 1.c. (Ex. J) He 
also paid the debt in SOR 1.l ($1,021) by monthly installments. (Tr. 37)  
 
Applicant has approximately $1,000 in his checking account and $1,800 in his 
saving account. (Ex. K) He has more than $20,000 in his company’s 401(k) retirement 
plan. (Ex. L) His annual salary is $49,400. (Ex. P) His cohabitant’s annual income is 
$35,000 to $40,000. His credit score has improved from 450 to 630. (Tr. 37) During the 
past few years, he has not acquired new debts. (Tr. 18) He recently paid off his 2005 
vehicle. (Tr. 33) He is paying his debts on time and is not receiving calls or letters from 
creditors demanding payment. (Tr. 34) 
  
 A summary of Applicant’s collection accounts and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Cable bill collection 
account. 
$165 Paid. (Ex. E) 
b Collection account. $275 
 
Paid. Starting in June 2012, Applicant 
made $200 monthly payments on this 
and the utility account debts listed in c. 
and k. below.  
c Utility company collection 
account. 
$965 
 
Paid on April 19, 2013. (Ex. A) 
d Collection account. $98 Paid on September 11, 2012. (Ex. B)  
e Utility company collection 
account. 
$918 Paid. (Ex. F) Starting in December 
2012, Applicant made monthly 
payments that totaled $1,197. (Ex. G) 
f Utility company collection 
account. 
$244 Paid. This is the same utility company 
listed in e. above. 
g Collection account. $100 Disputed. In February 2012, the account 
was challenged and deleted from his 
credit report. (Ex. C, Ex. D)  
h Medical collection 
account. 
$29 Paid on February 24, 2012. (Ex. H) 
i Apartment rent collection 
account. 
$1,021 Paid on September 23, 2011. (Ex. I) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
j Loan collection account. $583 Applicant disputes this debt, asserting 
he never obtained this loan. (Tr. 34) 
Applicant contacted the creditor and 
asked for proof that this was his debt, 
but the creditor refused to provide any 
documents. (Tr. 51) The debt has been 
removed from his current credit reports. 
(Tr. 34)  
k Collection account for 
utilitiy bill. 
$98 The account was challenged and 
removed from his credit report on 
September 13, 2012. (SOR Answer) 
l Repossessed vehicle. $10,022 
 
Yet to be addressed. 
m Medical collection 
account. 
$55 
 
Paid on February 27, 2012. (SOR 
Answer) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $14,573  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 After leaving the Army, Applicant experienced difficulty in paying his debts. He 
incurred collection accounts totaling approximately $14,500. Disqualifying Conditions 
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
After leaving the Army in 2004, Applicant experienced financial problems due to 
increased living expenses, a decrease in salary, and separating from his wife. The SOR 
lists 13 collection accounts. One debt has yet to be addressed. In 2003, while still in the 
Army, Applicant purchased a three year old car. He made his required monthly 
payments for approximately two years before the low paying job he obtained after 
leaving the Army and his separation from his wife made it impossible for him to continue 
his monthly payments. Following the repossession, the vehicle was sold, but the sale 
failed to reduce the amount he owed. His obligation following the sale was the same as 
when he made his last payment.  
 
Applicant chose to address all of the remaining SOR collection accounts before 
addressing the repossession. In so doing, he has established a track record of 
addressing his past due obligations. The concept of “meaningful track record” includes 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All 
that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his 
delinquent debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I must 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a 
reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there 
is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt 
plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
In the past, Applicant was able to address delinquent collection accounts by 
making monthly payments. I believe he will be able to reach an agreement with the 
holder of the vehicle loan and again pay the obligation by monthly payments.  
 
I conclude that the circumstances which gave rise to Applicant’s financial 
delinquencies are not likely to recur in the future. Additionally, he acted responsibly 
when faced with a collection accounts he did not recognize. Two collection accounts 
(SOR 1.g, $100 and SOR 1.k, $98) were removed from his credit report when he 
challenged them. He disputes one additional debt (SOR 1.j, $583) and requested the 
creditor provide documentation supporting the creditor’s claim that he owes the debt. 
The creditor has yet to provide the requested documentation. 
 
Applicant has acted in good faith to pay or settle his delinquent debts, and 
although he has not satisfied the vehicle repossession debt, he has displayed a 
determination to satisfy this financial obligation in the future. He made the decision to 
address the smaller delinquent debts before addressing the largest debt.  
 
Applicant has acted responsibly in addressing his financial delinquencies. By his 
actions, he has demonstrated that he is serious about satisfying his creditors and 
avoiding future debt. He provided documentary evidence to corroborate the payment of 
all but one of the delinquent collection accounts. I concluded that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are applicable in mitigation.  
 
The sole remaining debt does not raise concerns about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. After leaving the Army, Applicant’s 
income dropped. After obtaining his current job, he started addressing his delinquent 
collection accounts. One remains to be addressed, but his past conduct indicates he will 
pay this obligation.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – the 
majority have been paid – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about 
his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence 
establishes Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a — 1.m:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
