 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12904    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robert Lance, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen 
from Pakistan, who was initially granted a security clearance in 2007. Since her 2007 
background investigation, Applicant’s relationships with her two siblings, who are 
citizens and residents of Pakistan, have not changed. Nor have her siblings’ 
circumstances within the country changed. These relationships, though close, are not a 
source of influence, vulnerability, or exploitation for Applicant. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence and financial 
considerations guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
 Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on May 21, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and 
granted Department Counsel’s written request that I take administrative notice of certain 
facts about Pakistan, without objection from Applicant. The request and the attached 
documents have been included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I appended to 
the record as HE 2, the Applicant’s “Personal Summary” from the Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System (JPAS). Applicant did not submit any documents, but she and her 
personal representative testified. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issues 
SOR Amendments 
 
 Without objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion to 
withdraw the financial considerations allegation from the SOR.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 45, has worked as an engineer for a federal contractor since April 
2007. She initially applied for a security clearance in June 2007 and was granted a 
Secret clearance shortly thereafter. In July 2010, Applicant self-reported a December 
2009 home foreclosure to her facility security officer (FSO) who filed an incident report 
in JPAS, presumably initiating the present investigation. In addition to the potential 
security concerns raised by the foreclosure, DOD identified security issues related to 
Applicant’s relationship with her brother and sister, both of whom are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan.2   
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in Southwest Asia. After September 
11, 2001, Pakistan was one of only three countries to recognize the Taliban regime of 
Afghanistan. However, Pakistan reassessed its relations with the Taliban and pledged 
support to the United States and the international coalition in Operation Enduring 
Freedom, which aimed at removing the Taliban from power. Despite this support, 
members of the Taliban and Al-Qaida are known to be in the Federally Administered 
Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran 
and Afghanistan. Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the 
Afghan insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western 
interests in Pakistan and worldwide. The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the 
risks of travel to Pakistan in light of threats of terrorist activity. Since 2007, American 
citizens have been kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. Credible reports indicated 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 Tr. 63, 70; GE 1;  HE 2. 
 
3 
 
that authorities routinely intercepted and opened mail without requisite court approval, 
and monitored mobile phones and electronic messages.3 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1997 with her former husband and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2003. After her divorce in 2001, Applicant’s 
parents moved from Pakistan to the United States to provide emotional support to 
Applicant and her son during the divorce process. They became naturalized U.S. 
citizens in 2012. Applicant’s brother and sister remain in Pakistan. Applicant discussed 
her relationships with her siblings during an interview in July 2007 and again in March 
2011. Applicant’s brother continues to work as an engineer; her sister as a teacher in a 
primary school. Applicant maintains regular telephonic or Skype contact with her sister 
and her brother’s two daughters, both of whom are in medical school. Applicant and her 
sister send gifts to each other’s families on special occasions. Applicant has not 
traveled to Pakistan since 2000 and has no plans to do so in the future. Her sister 
traveled to the United States with her family in 2011 to visit Applicant and their parents.4  
  
 Since being granted access to classified information in 2007, Applicant’s life has 
undergone significant changes. Divorced at the time of her 2007 investigation, Applicant 
married her second husband, a U.S. citizen, in December 2009. Applicant’s husband 
works for the same federal contractor and holds a security clearance. The couple has a 
one-year-old daughter. Together, Applicant and her husband have a net worth of 
approximately $700,000 comprised of real estate holdings and savings accounts. They 
own the home they share with Applicant’s parents and Applicant’s 12-year-old son from 
her first marriage. She holds no financial interests in Pakistan.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
3 HE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 58-60, 54-55, 68; GE 2-3. 
 
5 Tr. 33-34, 72; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
At the hearing, Applicant expressed confusion about the government’s action to 
revoke her security clearance based on foreign contacts previously disclosed during her 
2007 investigation, effectively raising an issue of equitable estoppel. There is no right to 
a security clearance.6 A prior grant of a security clearance does not preclude the federal 
government from considering, as it has done here, whether to continue that grant or to 
revoke it at a future date.7 However, it worth noting that the foreign influence concerns 
raised in the present adjudication are based on the same information favorably 
adjudicated in 2007. There has been no appreciable change in Applicant’s relationships 
with her brother and sister. Nor have her siblings’ circumstances as citizens and 
residents of Pakistan changed since Applicant’s 2007 investigation. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
7 See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 99-0-0511 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2000) at 8; ISCR Case No. 99-0481 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 29, 000) at 5. 
 
5 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  Foreign influence concerns arise if an “applicant’s foreign contacts create 
divided loyalties or if an applicant may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”8 
 
 Mere possession of close ties with foreign family members is not disqualifying as 
a matter of law. However, close relationships with persons who are residents and 
citizens of a foreign country can be disqualifying if the contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; or if the 
relationship could create a potential conflict of interest between the applicant’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and her desire to help a foreign 
person.9 In evaluating whether a heightened risk exists, the nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant. Perilous conditions in Pakistan caused by the operation of the Taliban and Al-
Qaida create that heightened risk.  
 
 However, Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by her relationships with her foreign relatives. There is no evidence that 
Applicant’s family members are associated with or dependent upon the Pakistan 
government. Although Applicant maintains close relationships with her siblings, 
particularly her sister, there is no evidence to suggest that any of Applicant’s family 
members are in positions that raise a conflict of interest or serve as a source of 
exploitation or vulnerability for her.10 Since her last background investigation six years 
ago, Applicant has increased her ties to the United States. Applicant’s parents have 
become naturalized U.S. citizens. She has married a U.S. citizen and had another U.S.-
born child. Her U.S. - based assets have also increased substantially. Applicant has no 
financial interests in Pakistan, and she has not been returned to the country since 2000. 
Applicant’s life is firmly rooted in the United States, not Pakistan. Viewed in totality, 
these factors lead me to the conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States.11 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant does not have divided 
loyalties between the United States and Pakistan. Based on the evidence, I conclude 
that Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence concerns. 
 
 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 6.  
 
9 AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), (d). 
 
10 AG ¶ 8(a). 
 
11 AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Financial Considerations  WITHDRAWN 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                     
  
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
