 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-10742 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement, 
alcohol consumption, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 1999, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted a 
Security Clearance Application (SCA).1 On June 7, 2011, he submitted an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86).2 On unspecified dates, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
him three sets of interrogatories. He responded to the first set of interrogatories on 
September 26, 2012;3 the second set of interrogatories on November 16, 2012;4 and the 
                                                          
1
 GE 2 (SCA, dated March 23, 1999). 
 
2
 GE 1 (SF 86, dated June 7, 2011). 
 
3
 GE 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 26, 2012). 
 
4
 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated November 16, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
third set of interrogatories on January 22, 2013.5 On March 21, 2013, the DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), G (Alcohol Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 2, 2013. In a sworn statement, dated April 
17, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. He submitted a supplemental response on April 19, 2013. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on May 29, 
2013. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2013. A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on June 7, 2013, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on June 25, 2013.  
 
During the hearing, 7 Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 7) and 12 Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE L) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
and two other witnesses testified on his behalf. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on July 8, 2013. The record closed on July 8, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR under drug involvement (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.), alcohol consumption (¶¶ 2.a. 
through 2.d.), and personal conduct (¶¶ 3.a. through 3.c.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an electrical system integration specialist with his current employer since 
September 1995.6 He was previously employed as a shipping clerk, computer test 
operator, cleanroom video technician, and window tinter.7 Applicant never served in the 
U.S. military.8 He was granted a secret security clearance in either 1989, 1995, or 
                                                          
 
5
 GE 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 22, 2013). 
 
6
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 32. 
 
7
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 11; Tr. at 63. 
 
3 
                                      
 
2002.9 He successfully completed his General Educational Development (GED) in 
1990,10 and attended a course at a community college for about four months.11 
Applicant was married in December 1997,12 and separated in January 2012.13 He and 
his wife have two daughters, born in 1998 and 2004.14 
 
Drug Involvement and Alcohol Consumption  
 
Applicant was a substance abuser whose substances of choice were alcohol and 
several illegal drugs, including marijuana; lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), MDMA, 
known as ecstasy; and cocaine; as well as the prescription drug Xanax®.15 His use of 
drugs and alcohol resulted in three incidents involving the police and judicial authorities, 
as follows: driving under the influence (DUI), with a breathalyzer test result of 0.143, in 
1990; possession of drug paraphernalia in 1996 (which was eventually nolle prossed 
upon Applicant’s completion of a drug diversion program); and domestic violence 
(assault and reckless endangerment) in 2011 (which was nolle prossed when the victim 
failed to appear).16 
 
In his own words, Applicant has been “cursed with the disease of addiction.”17 He 
added, “I’m addicted to whatever numbs me, makes me feel good, lets me escape from 
reality.”18 His true history of substance abuse is rather difficult to specify as he has 
repeatedly furnished differing versions over the years. He has admitted, and I find, that 
he has used the following substances with varying frequency during the periods 
indicated: marijuana, from the early 1990s until at least May 2012; Xanax®, from about 
2005 to at least May 2012; cocaine, from about 1995 until about 2000; ecstasy, from 
about 1995 to about 1999; LSD, during the early 1990s;19 and alcohol, from about 1988 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9
 AE A (Statement, dated June 25, 2013), at 2; Tr. at 73; GE 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 28, 
2011), at 3. Applicant’s responses to the question regarding his security clearance were inconsistent, with three 
different dates furnished by him. 
  
10
 GE 5, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
11
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
12
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 13. 
 
13
 Tr. at 56.  
 
14
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 16. 
 
15
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
16
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 2; GE 6 (Statement of Subject, dated June 10, 1999), at 
2; GE 7 (Motion to Nolle Prosse, dated September 26, 1997). 
 
17
 AE A, supra note 9, at 1. Applicant was raised in an environment and lifestyle where alcohol and drugs 
freely available, where his mother and her frequent husbands drank too much alcohol, and her husbands did drugs. 
See, AE E (Statement, dated June 19, 2013). 
 
18
 Tr. at 57. 
 
19
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
4 
                                      
 
until June 2012.20 Xanax® was prescribed for him to control his anxiety, and while 
Applicant admitted using it, he contends he did so by following the prescribed dosage 
and use. He denied ever abusing Xanax®, except by consuming alcohol at the same 
time,21 and there is no other evidence reflecting misuse of the prescription drug. During 
the periods that he used the illegal drugs, Applicant purchased cocaine22 and 
marijuana.23 It is unclear how he obtained the other illegal substances. Applicant’s wife 
also consumed alcohol and used marijuana and cocaine.24  
 
Applicant’s abuse of alcohol and drugs resulted in several episodes of treatment, 
education, or aftercare. Following his 1990 alcohol-related arrest, Applicant complied 
with the court mandate that he attend a DUI program.25 Following his 1996 drug-related 
arrest, he completed a court mandated drug diversion program.26  
 
On January 30, 2009, Applicant underwent a 14-day alcohol detoxification and 
treatment program, initially in the clinical decision unit (CDU), but subsequently in the 
outpatient partial hospitalization unit. Applicant emphasized his alcohol use, but 
concealed his abuse of drugs and other chemicals. He was treated by a team consisting 
of a doctor of medicine (M.D.) and a primary counselor who is a Marriage and Family 
Therapist (MFT). The discharge diagnoses were as follows: Axis I, alcohol dependence; 
panic disorder, with agoraphobia; and depressive disorder, not otherwise specified; Axis 
II, no diagnosis; Axis III, sprained ankle, per patient; Axis IV, severe; and Axis V, Global 
Assessment of Functioning (GAF) 40/60. There was no prognosis made. Applicant was 
discharged from the program on February 13, 2009, with recommendations to enroll in 
an intensive outpatient, continuing care program; attend 12-step meetings; obtain a 
sponsorship; and participate in individual therapy.27  
 
Three days after his discharge, on February 16, 2009, he was enrolled as an 
outpatient in the 24-day chemical dependency program of the same facility. Once again, 
Applicant emphasized his alcohol use and denied any other drug use. He was treated 
by a team consisting of an M.D. and a primary counselor who is an Internationally 
Certified Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ICADC). The discharge diagnoses were as 
follows: Axis I, alcohol dependence; sedative/hypnotic dependence; and depressive 
                                                          
 
20
 Tr. at 20. There were times when a coworker observed Applicant early in the morning while at work 
suffering from the effects of a hangover. See, Tr. at 37. 
 
21
 Tr. at 57-58. 
 
22
 Tr. at 59. 
 
23
 Tr. at 68. 
 
24
 Tr. at 61. 
 
25
 GE 5, supra note 9, at 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
26
 GE 5, supra note 9, at 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
27
 GE 3 (Medical Records, various dates). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
disorder, not otherwise specified; and panic disorder, with agoraphobia; Axis II, no 
diagnosis; Axis III, none; Axis IV, severe psychosocial stressors with family, peer group, 
and emotional problems; and Axis V, Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) 50 at 
admission and 60 at discharge. There was no prognosis made. Applicant was 
discharged from the program on March 12, 2009, with recommendations to enroll in the 
continuing care program; attend three to five Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics 
Anonymous (NA) meetings per week; and make regular contact with his sponsor.28 
 
On June 17, 2012, Applicant underwent a 10-day alcohol treatment program in 
the outpatient partial hospitalization unit. He emphasized his alcohol use and admitted 
having tried marijuana on only one occasion. He was treated by a team consisting of an 
M.D. and a primary counselor who is an Associate Licensed Counselor (ALC), under 
the supervision of a licensed professional counselor (LPC). The discharge diagnoses 
were as follows: Axis I, alcohol (ETOH) dependence; chronic sedative-hypnotic use; 
and depression, not otherwise specified; Axis II, none; Axis III, a history of hypertension, 
among other issues, and recent concussion; Axis IV, stable, relating to primary group 
support issues; and Axis V, GAF 55. There was no prognosis made. Applicant was 
discharged from the program on June 27, 2012, with recommendations to enroll in an 
intensive outpatient, continuing care program; attend 12-step meetings; obtain a 
sponsor; and seek treatment for depression.29  
 
Three days after his discharge, on July 2, 2012, he was enrolled as an outpatient 
in the 38-day chemical dependency program of the same facility. He emphasized his 
alcohol use, but denied any other “significant drug use.” He was treated by a team 
consisting of an M.D. and a master’s level primary counselor. The discharge diagnoses 
were as follows: Axis I, alcohol dependence; chronic sedative/hypnotic use; cannabis 
abuse; and history of depression and anxiety, not otherwise specified; Axis II, no 
diagnosis; Axis III, essential hypertension; Axis IV, severe psychosocial stressors with 
relationships, marital, family, peer group, financial and emotional problems; and Axis V, 
GAF 50 at admission and 75 at discharge. There was no prognosis made. Applicant 
was discharged from the program on August 9, 2012, with recommendations to enroll in 
the continuing care program; attend three to five AA or NA meetings per week; maintain 
regular contact with his sponsor; and continue to follow up with his physician for 
medication management.30  
 
Since his discharge from the outpatient chemical dependency program, Applicant 
has routinely participated in the continuing care support group outpatient program.31 He 
also attends two or three AA meetings per week, and maintains regular contact with his 
sponsor, meeting with him on a weekly, and sometimes twice weekly, basis.32 
                                                          
28
 GE 3, supra note 27. 
 
29
 GE 3 (Medical Records, various dates). 
 
30
 GE 3, supra note 27. 
 
31
 AE C (Letter, dated June 14, 2013). 
 
32
 Tr. at 42, 73. 
  
 
6 
                                      
 
According to Applicant’s AA sponsor, Applicant has made it to the 4th step of the 12-
step recovery program.33 Of the hundred-plus people that the sponsor has worked with, 
only about five percent of those individuals make it to the 4th step.34 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s 1999 SCA contained the following question:35 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?  
 
Applicant answered “no.”36 He certified that his entries were true, complete, and 
accurate to the best of his knowledge and belief and were made in good faith.37 In 
reality, Applicant’s response was false. He subsequently admitted that he deliberately 
failed to disclose that he had used any of the illegal drugs he eventually admitted having 
used, or was still using.38 He explained that when the question arose, he felt fear 
because he wanted to keep his job and be able to obtain a clearance. He knew he was 
violating federal law when he lied, but he “didn’t care.”39 He added that his addiction 
didn’t give him very good judgment.40  
 
Applicant’s 2011 SF 86 contained the following question:41 
 
In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, ecstacy, ketamine, 
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)?  
 
                                                          
33
 Tr. at 45-47. 
 
34
 Tr. at 47. 
 
35
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 39, Question 27. 
 
36
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 39. 
 
37
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 42. 
 
38
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 1-2. 
 
39
 Tr. at 61-62. 
 
40
 Tr. at 62. 
 
41
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 21-22, Question 23. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Applicant answered “no.”42 He certified that his entries were true, complete, and correct 
to the best of his knowledge and belief and were made in good faith.43 In reality, 
Applicant’s response was again false. He subsequently admitted that he deliberately 
failed to disclose that he had used any of the illegal drugs he eventually admitted having 
used, or was still using.44 He explained that when the question arose, he was still fearful 
that he might lose his job, and especially his medical benefits for his autistic daughter, 
so he continued to lie about his substance abuse.45  
 
During his personal subject interview, conducted by an investigator from the U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in June 2011, Applicant denied ever using 
drugs of any kind or having any drug problems. He also professed to have no intention 
of ever using drugs in the future.46 Applicant’s response was again false. He eventually 
admitted that he deliberately failed to disclose that he had used any illegal drugs he 
eventually admitted having used, or was still using.47 Because he was still afraid about 
losing his job, he simply continued to lie about his substance abuse. 
 
Applicant specifically admitted that he had used illegal drugs while possessing a 
security clearance.48 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant’s work performance over an extensive period resulted in a number of 
company certificates of achievement, recognition, appreciation, and exceptional 
performance, as well as outstanding performance awards, and letters of appreciation.49 
Various coworkers, shop leads, program managers, and the union local lodge president, 
were very supportive of Applicant’s application to retain his security clearance, and were 
effusive with their praise for him. They noted Applicant’s work efforts, his integrity, 
honesty, trustworthiness, good character, and quality performance. They are all aware 
of his efforts to overcome his addictions, as well as his bad choices related to his 
falsifications and addictions.50 Applicant’s estranged wife acknowledged that he is a 
dedicated father and hard worker.51  
                                                          
42
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 22. 
 
43
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 42. 
 
44
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 1-2. 
 
45
 Tr. at 19, 69-70. 
 
46
 GE 5, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
47
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
48
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
49
 AE B (Various Certificates and Letters, various dates). 
 
50
 AE F (Character Reference, dated June 20, 2013); AE G (Character Reference, dated June 20, 2013); AE 
H (Character Reference, dated June 11, 2013); AE I (Character Reference, dated June 17, 2013); AE J (Character 
Reference, dated June 19, 2013); AE K (Character Reference, dated June 19, 2013); AE L (Character Reference, 
dated June 21, 2013); Tr. at 31, 34. 
 
8 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”52 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”53   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”54 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.55  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
51
 AE D (Character Reference, dated June 24, 2013). 
 
52
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
53
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
54
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
55
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”56 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”57 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
                                                          
56
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
57
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
10 
                                      
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), any drug abuse (see above definition), is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, 
under AG ¶ 25(c), illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, may 
raise security concerns. Also, where there is a diagnosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug 
dependence, AG ¶ 25(d) may apply. In addition, AG ¶ 25(g) may apply where there is 
any illegal evaluation of drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
  
Applicant routinely purchased and used marijuana and cocaine, and also used 
LSD and ecstasy. He never sold, supplied, or manufactured, any of the drugs he used. 
He used illegal drugs while he held a security clearance. Applicant’s abuse of drugs 
resulted in one arrest for possession of drug paraphernalia (although he denied the 
paraphernalia was his), and several substance abuse treatment or aftercare programs. 
Because Applicant lied to the healthcare providers throughout much of his earlier 
substance abuse treatment or aftercare programs, they focused on his alcohol abuse. 
Nevertheless, in 2012, he was diagnosed with chronic sedative/hypnotic use and 
cannabis abuse by a duly qualified medical professional. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), 25(d), and 
25(g) have been established.  
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. 
In addition, AG ¶ 26(d) may apply where there is satisfactory completion of a prescribed 
drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional. 
AG ¶ 26(d) minimally applies. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. Applicant’s 
abuse of marijuana, cocaine, ecstasy, and LSD, occurred over varying periods. The 
 
11 
                                      
 
marijuana abuse continued until at least mid-2012, only 15 months ago. His substance 
abuse was not motivated by peer pressure, but rather because it made him feel good, 
and enabled him to escape from reality. Applicant withheld significant substance abuse 
information from the staff at the various treatment and aftercare programs in which he 
was enrolled. Nevertheless, he was discharged from those programs in 1996 and 2009, 
only to experience repeated relapses. He failed to abstain until May 2012, and 
essentially failed to comply with all of the aftercare recommendations. Applicant 
completed the prescribed drug treatment programs in 2012, without any apparent 
recurrence of abuse to date. There is no evidence of any type of prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional. The record is also silent as to whether or not Applicant 
ever disassociated himself from his illegal drug co-users or suppliers. 
It is too early to conclude that there is a cumulative success of his inpatient, 
outpatient, and aftercare treatment. Applicant had previously sworn off drugs, only to 
resume his use of them. He contends he has a new outlook regarding substance abuse, 
and is an active participant in AA. Applicant’s most recent effort to demonstrate an 
intention not to abuse any drugs in the future, is unproven, until a more substantial 
period of abstinence is completed. Also, complete and clear disassociation from drug-
using associates, and avoidance of the environment where the drugs were used, is 
warranted. Applicant’s abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be encouraged to 
continue it and his aftercare treatment. However, considering his earlier failures, 
Applicant’s drug abuse or misuse may recur, and the uncertainty continues to cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent is potentially disqualifying. In addition, habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, may apply under AG ¶ 22(c).  
Similarly, a diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence is of security 
significance under AG ¶ 22(d). Also, AG ¶ 22(f) may apply if there is a relapse after 
diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation 
program.  
 
 
12 
                                      
 
AG ¶ 22(a) has been established by Applicant’s two alcohol-related incidents 
involving the police and judicial authorities. AG ¶ 22(c) has been established because 
Applicant repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment and 
intoxication. AG ¶ 22(d) has been established by the repeated diagnoses of alcohol 
dependence made by qualified medical professionals. AG ¶ 22(f) has been established 
by Applicant’s relapses and continued use of alcohol after completion of the various 
alcohol education and rehabilitation programs before 2012.  
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Similarly, when the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser), AG ¶ 23(b) may apply. In addition, AG ¶ 23(d) may apply if: 
 
The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(b) applies. AG ¶ 23(d) partially applies. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. For 
a number of years, Applicant simply ignored his alcohol problems because he was 
addicted to whatever numbed him, made him feel good, and let him escape from reality. 
He consumed alcohol frequently, and it resulted in his attendance at several alcohol-
related treatment, education, and aftercare programs. Although he completed those 
programs, before 2012, he routinely relapsed back into his earlier pattern of alcohol 
consumption. But something apparently changed after Applicant and his wife separated 
and he completed his most recent alcohol treatment programs.  In June 2012, Applicant 
decided that alcohol was bad for him. He has apparently been abstinent since then. He 
resumed his attendance at AA meetings and routinely meets or speaks with his 
sponsor. There is no evidence of any type of prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional. 
As it was with Applicant’s drug problems, so it is with his alcohol dependence. It 
is too early to conclude that there is a cumulative success of his inpatient, outpatient, 
and aftercare treatment. Applicant had previously sworn off alcohol, only to resume his 
use of it. He contends he has a new outlook regarding alcohol, and is an active 
participant in AA. Applicant’s most recent effort to demonstrate an intention not to 
consume any alcohol in the future is unproven, until a more substantial period of 
abstinence is completed. Applicant’s abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be 
 
13 
                                      
 
encouraged to continue it and his aftercare treatment. However, considering his earlier 
failures, Applicant’s alcohol dependence may recur, and the uncertainty continues to 
cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), security concerns may be raised when there is a: 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Under AG ¶ 16(b), security concerns may be raised by: 
deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical 
authority, or other official government representative.  
AG ¶ 16(e) may apply where there is: 
personal conduct or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
Applicant’s responses to the SCA and SF 86 inquiries and to the questions of the 
OPM investigator were false and concealed the full scope of Applicant’s substance 
abuse and treatment history. He was diagnosed and treated for alcohol dependence 
and sedative/hypnotic dependence; he routinely failed to comply with recommended 
aftercare; and he used illegal drugs while possessing a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 
16(b), and 16(e) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
 
14 
                                      
 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, 
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. As to Applicant’s responses to the SCA and 
SF 86 inquiries and to the questions of the OPM investigator, he deliberately failed to 
disclose that he had used any of the illegal drugs he eventually admitted having used, 
or was still using. He was afraid because he wanted to keep his job and be able to 
obtain a clearance. He knew he was violating federal law when he lied, but he “didn’t 
care.” AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, G, and E, in my analysis below.      
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s 
illegal drug abuse and dependence supposedly ceased in May 2012, and his alcohol 
consumption ceased in June 2012. He has purportedly been abstinent since those 
times. He has been with his current employer since September 1995. He is an 
outstanding worker, as well as a loving and caring father.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant routinely purchased and used marijuana and cocaine, and also used LSD and 
ecstasy. He used illegal drugs while he held a security clearance. Applicant’s abuse of 
drugs and alcohol resulted in three arrests, and several substance abuse treatment or 
aftercare programs. He routinely and intentionally lied to the healthcare providers 
throughout much of his earlier substance abuse treatment or aftercare programs; on his 
SCA in 1999; on his SF 86 in 2011; and to the OPM investigator in 2011. He knew he 
was violating federal law when he lied, but he “didn’t care.” Applicant was diagnosed 
with alcohol dependence, chronic sedative/hypnotic use, and cannabis abuse by a duly 
 
15 
                                      
 
qualified medical professional. Despite completing a DUI program following his 1990 
arrest; a drug diversion program following his 1996 arrest; and various substance abuse 
treatment programs in 2009, he resumed his abuse of alcohol and illegal drugs. 
Applicant’s actions over such a lengthy period, as well as his changing stories, indicate 
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. 
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.58 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude he has failed to mitigate the drug involvement, alcohol consumption, 
and personal conduct security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
58
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
