 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-12293 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 21, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing/Security Clearance Application (e-QIP; SF 86). On February 
5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 15, 2013. He answered 
the SOR in writing on March 14, 2013, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the 
request on or about March 15, 2013. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
April 30, 2013, and I received the case assignment on May 9, 2013. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on June 6, 2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 
 
2 
 
 
24, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through N, without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 11, 2013. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until July 15, 2013, to submit additional matters.  On 
July 19, 2013, he submitted Exhibits O through V, without objection. The record closed 
on July 19, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 1.j, alleging 
“Applicant is indebted to his state Department of Taxation, in the approximate amount of 
$36,669.52 for delinquent taxes, and as of June 24, 2013, this debt remains unpaid.” 
(Tr. 44, 45) Applicant admitted the debt listed in the new Subparagraph 1.j. (Tr. 51) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e, and 1.h to 1.j of the SOR, as amended, with explanations. 
He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g of the SOR because he asserted they 
were the same allegations as stated in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, respectively. He provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 53 years old, divorced, and has no children. For 17 years, until 2011, 
he operated a pizza restaurant with his mother and sister. When the landlord died and 
the new management company wanted to increase the rent by 40%, Applicant decided 
to close the business. His mother and sister later reopened the restaurant in a smaller 
facility at another location. Applicant assumed the tax debts so his family could reopen 
the restaurant. He then returned to his prior work as a computer software developer as, 
he had previously obtained his college degree at a local university. (Tr. 19-22, 40, 53; 
Exhibits 1-6, M) 
 
 Applicant owes nine delinquent debts totaling $46,425, as listed in the original 
SOR. With the addition of the additional allegation about the state tax debt, he owed 10 
delinquent debts totaling $73,672.52. Then, deducting two duplicate debts, he owes 
eight debts. Two debts he contends are duplicates (Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.f are 
owed to the same creditor, and Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.g are also owed to another 
creditor.) The debts are reconciled to only the higher amounts in Subparagraphs 1.f and 
1.g. After deducting the two lesser amounts in Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, the total 
owed is $37,003 plus the state tax debt for $36,669.52, equaling the $73,672.52 cited 
above. Applicant also owes $12,000 to his former accountant for work done relating to 
Applicant’s pizza restaurant business. That debt is not listed in the SOR or amended 
into it. (Tr. 9, 14, 15, 50; Exhibits 1-6, A-V) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes $7,315 on a credit card (Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.f). He 
arranged an installment payment agreement with the creditor and made four payments 
by the date of the hearing, starting in March 2013. The payments are $300 each month. 
This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 15, 28; Exhibits 1-4, 6, A, I)  
 
 Applicant owes $5,506 to a creditor on a credit card (Subparagraphs 1.b and 
1.g). He negotiated with the collector to establish an installment payment agreement. 
He made four payments on that agreement by the time of the hearing, starting in March 
2013. The payments are $200 each. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 15, 28; Exhibits 1-
4, 6, B, I)  
 
 Applicant owes $1,200 on a judgment entered for a creditor in 2010 
(Subparagraph 1.c). This debt arose from a credit card used at a home improvement 
center. Applicant settled the account for $776.94, which was paid on April 15,. This debt 
is resolved. (Tr. 15, 16; Exhibits 1-4, 6, A-K; Answer attachments) 
 
 Applicant owes $115 to a medical creditor for services rendered (Subparagraph 
1.d). This debt was paid in full on March 2, 2013. This debt is resolved as shown by the 
letter from the creditor attached to Applicant’s answer and dated March 6, 2013. (Tr. 16; 
Exhibits 1-4, 6, D; Answer attachments) 
 
 Applicant owes $52 for a telephone bill (Subparagraph 1.e). This debt is resolved 
by payment of $31.49 on February 26, 2013. Applicant submitted a letter from the 
collector dated March 7, 2013, showing a zero balance. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 16; 
Exhibits 1-4, 6, E; Answer attachments) 
 
 Applicant owes $21,815 to the U.S. Government on a tax lien filed against him in 
2004 (Subparagraph 1.h) for unpaid payroll taxes. He filed all the required tax returns. 
This debt resulted from the failure of Applicant’s pizza business. Applicant hired an 
attorney to represent him with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to attempt to resolve 
this debt. An offer in compromise was filed by the attorney on June 19, 2013, for 
$1,000. Applicant made a $200 good-faith payment on that offer. The offer is pending 
with the IRS. Applicant is attempting to resolve this debt. (Tr. 17-21, 41, 42; Exhibits 1-
4, 6, F, G, O, P) 
 
 Applicant owes $1,000 to a city taxing authority for an earnings tax 
(Subparagraph 1.i). This debt results from Applicant’s business and its closure. He is 
represented by an attorney in this matter. The Answer states the matter is being 
resolved by an installment agreement on which Applicant is making payments until paid 
in full. Applicant claims that since August 2011 he has tried to pay $300 monthly to 
repay this debt. Some months he cannot make a payment because his income and 
expenses do not allow him to do so. Applicant is attempting to resolve this debt by 
making the installment payments. The payment statements in Exhibit H show Applicant 
has paid about $500 in 2013 on this debt, leaving a balance of about $500. (Tr. 17-21, 
39; Exhibits 1-4, 6, F, G, O, P, V; Answer attachments)  
   
 
4 
 
 
Applicant is indebted to his state Department of Taxation, in the approximate 
amount of $36,669.52 for delinquent payroll taxes (Subparagraph 1.j). This debt 
remains unpaid, but Applicant has been paying since 2009 on this debt. He filed all 
required tax forms. In 2011 he contacted the assistant attorney general to enter an 
installment payment agreement on this debt. He has paid $9,200 since 2009 on the 
debt. He paid $300 monthly on the debt until his attorney recently filed an offer in 
compromise with the state, and the payments were reduced to $200 monthly in 
February 2013. Applicant is attempting to resolve this debt. (Tr. 43-47; Exhibits 1-4, 6, 
G) 
 
Applicant also owes about $12,000 to an accounting firm he employed while his 
family operated its pizza restaurant. He pays the firm about $100 monthly on the debt. 
This debt is not listed in the SOR. The balance on this debt Applicant thinks is about 
$8,000. (Tr. 50; Exhibits 1-4, 6)  
 
Applicant has not had any financial counseling. (Tr. 53) 
 
Applicant submitted six character letters. The authors of these letters comment 
favorably on Applicant’s diligence at work, his commitment to producing a quality 
product, his honesty, and individual responsibility. (Exhibit M) 
 
Applicant presented his evidence in a logical and forthright manner. His 
testimony was detailed and credible about his past financial problems that arose 
substantially from his family’s adversely affected business. He assumed all the tax debt 
to spare his mother and sister that burden. (Tr. 21)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant accumulated $73,672.52 in delinquent debt from 2009 to the present 
time that was unresolved as stated in the SOR as amended. This total includes the 
deduction of the two duplicate debts. Applicant has eight delinquent debts listed in the 
SOR as amended. He owed another $12,000 to his former accountant for work relating 
to Applicant’s pizza restaurant, though that balance is reduced now to $8,000.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
Applicant is paying his debts in an orderly manner within the available financial 
resources he has. He resolved three debts for $115, $52, and $1,200. He makes 
payments on installment agreements for two other debts. He is also paying monthly 
amounts to the local and state taxing authorities on their debts. He was paying monthly 
amounts to the IRS on a payroll tax debt. Now he has an attorney who submitted an 
offer in compromise to resolve the $21,815 federal tax debt. He made a good faith 
payment of $200 on that debt. Applicant is addressing each debt as he is financially 
able to do so. His accountant’s debt is reduced to $8,000 from $12,000. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) is applicable because the economic conditions, a business 
downturn, that forced the closing of Applicant’s pizza restaurant were beyond his control 
after 17 years in business. Applicant sought to minimize his financial losses by closing 
the restaurant. He assumed the debts so that his mother and sister could open a 
smaller restaurant later. Since then Applicant has tried to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20 (c) 
has partial application because his debts are under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 
(d) also applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay his delinquent debts 
based on the same facts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  In addition, 
under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not ignored his 
delinquent debts. He is attempting to resolve the largest ones by installment payment 
agreements and the tax debts by similar arrangements or through an offer in 
compromise. He paid three smaller debts before the hearing. Applicant is working 
through legal channels to resolve his debts, and there is no likelihood or potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress because of his efforts and the nature of the 
debts.  
 
Applicant’s testimony and his documents show his continuing efforts to resolve 
his delinquent debt, particularly the federal and state income tax debts. He is paying 
somewhat regularly on his local tax debt that it is now half of the original amount. His 
pattern of responsible payments makes it likely he will continue to seek resolution of the 
debts. His offer in compromise to the IRS and the contact with the state tax authorities 
on his own initiative support this conclusion. They demonstrate Applicant’s honesty, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment in paying his past due debts. His character 
references support this evaluation of Applicant. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  For Applicant 
   
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
