 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11550    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant admits he owes approximately $38,697 in 
unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order DOD Directive,1 on January 9, 2013, 
the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline. DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within DOD on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG were 
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace 
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on May 15, 2013. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on May 24, 2013. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM; accordingly, the items appended to the Government’s brief are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The case was assigned to me on 
July 24, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, is employed by a federal contractor as a site safety manager.  This 
is his first application for a security clearance.2  
 
 Applicant admits that he is indebted to 30 creditors for approximately $38,697. 
He attributes his financial problems to two periods of unemployment from November 
2002 to November 2003 and June 2009 to August 2009, as well as his 2011 divorce. 
Although Applicant does not elaborate on the issue, a serious medical condition may 
have also exacerbated his financial problems. Applicant, who has a net remainder of 
$200 after paying his recurring monthly obligations, cannot afford to repay his creditors 
at this time. He tried to enroll in a debt consolidation program, but could not afford the 
payments. He has not contacted any of his creditors to negotiate or establish payment 
plans. The delinquent accounts reflecting zero balances on Applicant’s credit reports 
are not evidence that he paid or otherwise resolved the accounts, but rather the 
creditors’ decision to charge off the outstanding balances.3    
 
 Even though Applicant is unable to address his delinquent debt, he is current on 
his child support obligation and he no longer uses consumer credit.4 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
                                                          
2 GE 4. 
 
3 GE 4-8; Answer.  
 
4 GE 4-5. 
 
3 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”5 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.6 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,7 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.8  
 
  Applicant admits he owes over $38,600 in delinquent debt. The allegations are 
supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie case.9 Applicant 
has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of not doing so.10  
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
7 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
9 GE 6-8; Answer. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
 
4 
 
While events beyond Applicant’s control (e.g. periods of unemployment, a divorce, and 
medical issues) may have contributed to his financial problems, he has presented no 
evidence to warrant the application of any of the financial considerations mitigating 
conditions. Absent evidence to the contrary, I find that his financial problems are recent 
and ongoing. Also, I am unable to determine that Applicant’s financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. Consequently, Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to meet his burdens 
of production and persuasion. At a minimum, an applicant is expected to provide 
information, orally or documentary, regarding his finances.11 Without this evidence, the 
record cannot support a finding of financial rehabilitation. Following Egan12 and the 
clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.dd:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 00-0104 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2001). 
 
12 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
