 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14644 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 29, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant 
interrogatories to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information. After reviewing 
the results of the background investigation and Applicant's response to the 
interrogatories, DOD could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security 
clearance. On March 29, 2013, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns for use of information technology systems under 
Guideline M and personal conduct under Guideline E. These actions were taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
 
 
2 
 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 
2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 3, 2013. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 16, 2012. He admitted in part and denied in 
part the use of information technology systems allegation under SOR 1.a, and admitted 
the allegation under SOR 1.b. The same conduct was cross-alleged as personal 
conduct security concerns under Guideline E. Applicant admitted in part and denied in 
part the allegation under Guideline E, consistent with his admissions and denials to 
SOR paragraph 1. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 17, 2013. The case was assigned to me on 
June 21, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing on June 27, 2013, for a hearing on July 30, 2013. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered two exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 and 2. Applicant testified 
and offered four exhibits which I marked and admitted into the record without objection 
as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through D. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on August 7, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. His admissions are included in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old telecom systems administrator for a defense 
contractor. He married in 2004 and has no children. He was homeschooled until 
college. He has two years of college but did not earn a degree. (Tr. 11-12; Gov. Ex. 1, 
e-QIP, dated July 29, 2011) 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns for both use of information technology 
systems and personal conduct. Under use of information technology systems, it is 
alleged that Applicant, between January 2008 and May 2011, intentionally accessed 
and misused the unlocked computers of coworkers in violation of company policy (SOR 
1.a); and between April 2010 and May 2011 he intentionally misused his elevated 
administrator rights to read text messages and emails of coworkers in violation of 
company rules and policies (SOR 1.b).  
Applicant self-reported these allegations when he completed his security 
clearance application in July 2011. (Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated July 29, 2011, section 27) 
The workstations for Applicant and his co-workers in the information technology 
department (IT) of their employer were visible to all in the workplace. The company 
policy was for employees to secure, or lock, their work computer before leaving the 
workstation unattended. (Tr. 15-36) 
The company policy also extended to the actions to take when finding an 
unlocked computer. The individual finding an unlocked computer was to lock the 
 
 
3 
 
computer and notify the co-worker that the computer was left unlocked and should be 
locked when not attended. However, it was common practice in the IT department to 
access the unlocked computer, use it, and place some type of funny message or open a 
funny web browser so the individual knew their computer was left unlocked.  
On his security clearance application, Applicant stated that on a number of 
occasions, he accessed an unlocked coworker’s computer, and against company policy 
left something to indicate it had been left unlocked. His usual practice was to open a 
funny web page. On one occasion, he sent a message to another IT person in a nearby 
cubicle who was talking to the person that left their computer unlocked. Both the other 
workers would know that the computer was left unlocked. After Applicant reported the IT 
department practices in 2011, the correction procedures were clarified. Now when a 
computer is discovered unlocked, the members of the IT department lock the computer 
and place a small sign on the computer to show it had been left unlocked. (Tr. 36-42) 
As the telecom administrator for his company, Applicant had enhanced access to 
the telephone and e-mail system of the company. One of his functions was to monitor 
the systems to determine that company employees used the systems in accordance 
with company policy. He monitored the level of phone calls and text messages, as well 
as whether the use was for business or personal reasons. However, Applicant 
exceeded his authority by continuing to look at text messages and e-mails beyond that 
required to perform his job requirements. He continued to look at the information 
because he was curious. Applicant stopped exceeding his authority in 2011. He self-
reported on the security clearance application that on a number of occasions he 
continued to monitor the systems after making the findings required for his administrator 
duties. He stopped his action over two years ago when he completed his security 
clearance application. (Tr. 42-51) 
Applicant presented letters of recommendation and accomplishment from co-
workers, friends, and family members. A friend wrote that she has known Applicant for 
over 14 years and observed that he conducts himself ethically and legally in all aspects 
of his life. He is dedicated to the community and his job. Applicant explained to her the 
full extent of his wrongful actions as noted above and she understands his violations of 
company policy. She still finds that he is responsible and trustworthy. She recommends 
he be granted access to classified information. (App. Ex. A, Letter, undated) 
A friend wrote that she has known Applicant for over 13 years. In her opinion, he 
is sincere, honest, and a professional dedicated to his job. He is responsible and 
diligent in his work. Applicant informed her of his actions causing security concerns. He 
told her he was wrong in what he did and it would never happen again. She believes he 
is sincere. He is an outstanding member of the community. She recommends he be 
granted eligibility for access to classified information. (App. Ex. B, Letter, undated) 
A third friend wrote that she has known Application for over ten years when they 
worked together at another job and company. Applicant was an eager and hard worker. 
She never saw him engage in an improper action, or violate rules and regulations. She 
 
 
4 
 
finds him to be dependable, reliable, law abiding, and trustworthy, and he exercises 
good judgment. (App. Ex. C, Letter, undated) 
Applicant’s brother, an Air Force intelligence officer, wrote that he has known 
Applicant all of his life. He has seen Applicant’s attention to detail and efforts to correctly 
complete all projects. He discussed the allegations with Applicant. Applicant realizes 
that he violated the trust placed in him as an IT administrator. Applicant voluntarily 
stopped his actions when he realized that they were contrary to policy and beyond the 
scope of his function. He voluntarily reported them on his security clearance application. 
This indicates that Applicant wants to be completely honest, open, reliable, and 
trustworthy in his duties. He believes Applicant is trustworthy and capable of protecting 
classified information. He recommends that Applicant be granted eligibility for access to 
classified information. (App. Ex. D, Letter, undated) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 A security concern is raised by noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines 
or regulations pertaining to information technology systems reflecting on an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness, and calling into question the willingness or ability to 
properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information. Information Technology 
Systems include related computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communications, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. (AG ¶ 39) 
 
 Applicant admits he accessed co-workers unlocked computers in violation of 
company policy to let them know that their computer was left unlocked when it was not 
being used. Applicant’s use of the computer was in violation of company policy which 
was to not access the unlocked computer but lock the computer and notify the individual 
the computer was left unlocked. Applicant also admits that he accessed co-workers e-
mails, text messages, and other systems beyond what he need to perform his function 
as the telecom systems administrator. Applicant’s actions raise disqualifying condition 
AG ¶ 40(a) (illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof); and AG ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or other 
information technology system).  
 
 Applicant raised the mitigating conditions AG ¶ 41(a) (so much time has elapsed 
since the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment); AG ¶ 41(b) (the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of 
organizational efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily available; and AG ¶ 
41(c) (the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a prompt good-
faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of supervisor). These mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
 Applicant and his fellow IT co-workers used an inappropriate method to alert 
coworkers they left their computer unlocked when not at their desk. When a computer 
was left unlocked, the company policy was to lock the computer and notify the 
individual. Rather than lock the computer, Applicant and his IT co-workers would access 
or use the unlocked computer to send a message using a funny website or message 
 
 
6 
 
that the computer was left unlocked. The process used by the IT workers was unusual 
and not in compliance with company policy. It was used within the IT department for 
many years. Applicant self-reported the process that was in violation of company policy 
and the practice was changed over two years ago to be in compliance with company 
policy. While Applicant’s actions were inappropriate, they were done in the best interest 
of the organization and in an attempt to have all workers comply with company policy. It 
was not done with malice or vindictiveness. I find for Applicant as to the allegations 
under Guideline M. 
 
Personal Conduct: 
 
A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
the central question whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person 
can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. (AG ¶ 15)   
 
Applicant’s actions in accessing unlocked computers of his co-workers and 
exceeding his systems administrator’s functions raise the following personal conduct 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information);  
 
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicting that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations); and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing).  
 
 I considered the following personal conduct mitigating conditions: 
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);  
 
AG ¶17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur); and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).   
 
 As noted above, Applicant’s violation of company policy that led to the improper 
use of the company information technology systems are minor and were not done for 
wrongful, malicious, or vindictive reasons. Applicant used an improper approach to 
correct a problem in the IT department. Applicant had the authority to review co-workers 
phone use, text messages, and e-mail to determine compliance with company policy. 
He exceeded his authority when he continued to review co-workers accounts after 
determining the usage was proper and in compliance with company policy. While he 
exceeded his authority, he acknowledged his errors and stopped the practice. He self-
reported his improper actions. I find that the incidents happened under unique 
circumstances and his improper computer use and the exceeding of his authority are 
unlikely to recur. Applicant mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is highly 
regarded by his friends and family. 
 
Applicant chose an improper method to correct a problem in the IT department of 
his employers. He also exceeded at times his authority as the telecom systems 
administrator. Applicant’s actions were wrong but not intended to be harmful or 
deceitful. They were not reckless, irresponsible, or the result of poor judgment. The 
actions were minor and unlikely to happen in the future. He realizes his errors and self-
reported his actions. His actions and his handling of the incidents do not indicate that he 
has questionable judgment, is untrustworthy, lacks reliability, or is unwilling to comply 
with rules and regulations. These incidents do not raise questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The incidents do 
not indicate Applicant may not properly handle, manage, or safeguard classified 
information. The record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct and use of information 
technology systems security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
