 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 11-13804 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), and the exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. His request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his April 3, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under 
the financial considerations guideline, except allegations 1.c, 1.f, and 1.n. Applicant also 
requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department 
Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) prepared a written 
presentation of the Government’s case in a FORM dated May 21, 2013. On June 10, 
2013, Applicant received the Government’s FORM, and was given 30 days to file 
objections and submit material to refute or mitigate the security concerns. No response 
 
 
 
2 
was received. The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2013, for an administrative 
decision based on the record. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
In its FORM, the Government amended the SOR to add one allegation under 
paragraph 1, as follows: 
 
u. You are indebted to the Internal Revenue Service for delinquent federal 
taxes in the approximate amount of $1,500. As of the date of the 
Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid. 
 
 Within the 30 days provided, Applicant did not object to the amendment, or 
respond to the FORM. He did not provide an admission or denial to the Government’s 
proposed allegation. I construe Applicant to have denied the allegation. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and the evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31-year-old high school graduate. He served as an enlisted member 
of the Navy from 2001 until his honorable discharge in 2005. He was unemployed for 
several months in 2005, and again for about seven months in 2006. He has worked 
full-time as a security officer since 2008, although he moved to another company in 
January 2013, where he holds the same position. (Items 4, 7)  
 
 Applicant has lived with his fiancée and her three children since 2007. His 
fiancée is the leaseholder on the apartment, but Applicant pays the $880 monthly rent. 
As of 2011, he was the only provider for the family, which has caused financial 
problems. Applicant also has a biological son who is 11 years old. He lives with his 
mother, and as of 2011, Applicant was providing monthly child support of $150 to $200 
through automatic deduction from his salary.1 (Item 7) 
 
 At his 2011 security interview, Applicant stated he could not afford anything 
other than his rent and food, but he planned to pay his delinquencies. He stated that 
his financial problems stemmed from circumstances beyond his control: In May 2007, 
his mother was murdered, and his stepfather and cousin were also shot. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that these events affected his finances, but did not specify how. 
He also handled his mother’s finances, which affected his ability to meet his own bills. 
In addition, Applicant was hospitalized in 2006 for pneumonia and “mercer.” As of his 
2011 interview, he planned to obtain a second job to help resolve his debts. (Item 7) 
                                                 
1 Applicant changed jobs in January 2013, and the pay statement for his current job does not indicate 
that child support is being deducted from his salary. (Item 7) 
 
 
3 
 In his 2011 security interview, Applicant stated he had not received financial 
counseling. However, in his interrogatory response of January 2013, he noted that he 
is “working with a debt consolidation company.” He attached documents from the 
company showing a list of nine debts to be paid, some of which appear in the SOR. 
However, there is no documentation showing that Applicant has made payments on 
any of the listed debts. He also stated in his interrogatory response that he paid a bill of 
$114.24 on January 24, 2013. He provided a contact name and confirmation number, 
but no supporting documentation. The creditor is not listed in the SOR. (Item 7) 
 
 Evidence supporting the debts alleged in the SOR appear in Applicant's credit 
reports of 2011 through 2013, his security clearance application, and his subject 
interview. Six of Applicant's delinquencies relate to medical debts (allegations 1.b – 1.f 
and 1.p). They total $1,328. Another four debts, totaling $1,832, relate to cell phones 
and/or cable. None of these debts are paid. (Item 1)  
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant is indebted to several government entities. 
He owes a total of $370 for three debts owed to a city where he lived several years 
ago. The debts became delinquent in 2006 and 2007 (allegations 1.j – 1.l) Applicant 
stated in his security interview that he disputed the debts, and could not remember any 
information about the accounts. (Items 4-8) 
 
 Applicant also owed unpaid taxes to the state government where he currently 
resides. He provided documentation showing that his tax refunds for tax years 2009 
through 2011 were seized to pay these back taxes. No current tax debt to this state 
appears in his credit reports. (Item 4) Applicant indicated in his 2011 security clearance 
application he owed $1,500 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) (allegation 1.u). He 
also disclosed this debt, stemming from unpaid income taxes for 2009 and 2010, 
during his security interview. At that time, he planned to pay the debt in 2011. His credit 
reports do not show an outstanding debt owed to the IRS. (Items 4-8)  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied allegations 1.c, 1.f, and 1.n, stating 
that he paid these debts. He provided no evidence that he has paid the debts at 
allegations 1.c or 1.f -- two medical accounts, each past due in the amount of $175. 
The largest SOR debt appears at allegation 1.n. It relates to a balance of $3,054 on an 
automobile loan. His 2011 credit report shows the account was opened in 2004, and 
the last activity occurred in May 2005. Applicant stated in his security clearance 
application that the debt was paid in full, and during his security interview he said that 
he paid the balance in full in 2009. He provided documentation showing that the 
collection agency that handled the account retained no interest in the collateral, as of 
April 2010. His 2012 and 2013 credit reports show a zero balance. (Items 2, 4, 5, 7) 
 
 Applicant submitted a January 2013 pay statement showing net pay of $575. His 
January 2013 personal financial statement (PFS) shows that he earns $1,225 net 
monthly income, which includes his fiancee’s net income of $250 per month. His 
 
 
4 
monthly expenses total $2,179. He did not list payments on any debts. It appears from 
the PFS that Applicant has a negative cash flow of $954 per month. (Item 7) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and policy in the AG.2 Decisions must also 
reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government must produce 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the 
applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a 
“right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as her or his own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
                                                 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
2 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
3 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
4 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . .  
 
 Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts and has been unable to pay 
them. The debts in the SOR total $10,517. His history of financial delinquencies 
supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, I considered the following conditions that can potentially 
mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Although Applicant’s debts started becoming delinquent in about 2005, they are 
not in the distant past because most of the debts remain unpaid. His unresolved 
financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) relates to financial problems that stem from conditions that an 
applicant could not foresee or control, and which have a negative effect on his 
finances. Some of Applicant’s debts resulted from circumstances beyond his control, 
 
 
6 
including his hospitalization in 2006, and the subsequent loss of his job. He was also 
unemployed in 2005 after his discharge from the Navy. Applicant also suffered the 
tragic and unexpected loss of several family members in 2007. He stated that this 
affected his finances, though the connection is unclear. In 2011, Applicant was the sole 
support of his family of five, and was providing child support for another son. However, 
Applicant's hospitalization and unemployment were seven to eight years ago. In 
addition, Applicant's fiancée now contributes to the family income. For full mitigation, 
an applicant must show that he has acted reasonably in response to the unexpected 
circumstances. Here, Applicant stated he retained a debt-consolidation service, but 
provided no evidence of payments made on any debts. Applicant receives only partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant stated in his Answer that he paid three of the SOR debts. However, he 
submitted no documentation to support his claim as to allegations 1.c or 1.f. The 
Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect Applicants to 
present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.”6 The record does 
include evidence that Applicant has paid the car loan at allegation 1.n. He provided 
evidence that the collection agency that held the debt has no remaining interest in the 
collateral. In addition, Applicant’s two most recent credit reports list the creditor, and 
show a balance of zero. I find for the Applicant as to allegation 1.n. Although Applicant 
has taken steps toward dealing with his debts, in particular by conferring with a debt-
resolution company, there is no evidence he has begun payments. His finances are not 
under control, and AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
 During his security interview, Applicant stated he disputed some of the accounts 
on his credit reports. However, there is no evidence showing the basis of his dispute, 
that he notified the credit agencies, or took other steps to resolve the dispute. AG ¶ 
20(e) cannot be applied. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                                 
6 ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010, quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 1, 2006)). 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant accrued more than $10,000 in delinquent debt. He was on notice that 
delinquent debts are a security concern since 2011, when he completed his security 
clearance application. Although applicants are not required to be debt free, they are 
expected to develop a plan to resolve their debts, and provide evidence that they are 
implementing that plan.7 In January 2013, Applicant contacted a debt-consolidation 
company, but there is no evidence he has begun payments or otherwise implemented 
a plan to deal with his debts. In light of his negative cash flow, it is unlikely Applicant 
will be able to substantially change his financial situation in the near future. 
 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.t  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.u   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
7 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
