 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
            )  ISCR Case No. 11-12622 
                                                                      )                                            
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
       
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of all evidence in the record of this case, and after 
carefully observing Applicant and assessing his demeanor and credibility in light of the 
applicable adjudicative guidelines and the whole-person concept, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                 Statement of the Case 
 
As the employee of a defense contractor, Applicant completed and signed an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on February 17, 2011. 
On January 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On February 19, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. On February 20, 
2013, he provided a notarized statement in which he elected to have a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2013. I convened a 
hearing on June 19, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called 
no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were marked as Exhibit (Ex.) 1, Ex. 2; 
Ex. 3; and Ex. 4 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified and 
called no other witnesses. He offered 10 exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through 
Ex. J and entered in the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left 
the record open so that Applicant could provide additional information for the record 
which might mitigate the conduct alleged in the SOR. Applicant timely filed two 
additional exhibits, which were marked as Ex. K and Ex. L and entered in the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr. 1) of the hearing on June 27, 2013, 
and the record also closed on June 27, 2013.  
 
                                                       Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is 43 years old and employed by a government contractor. He married 
in 1993 and divorced in 2001. He has no children. In 2010, he earned a bachelor’s 
degree. (Ex. 1; Tr. 33.) 
 
 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military in 1988. He specialized in aircraft 
maintenance and readiness, and he rose to the rank of technical sergeant. Because of 
his expertise, he was given high-profile assignments. In 2011, he retired from active 
military service and received an honorable discharge. He receives a monthly military 
pension of approximately $1,300 and monthly military disability pay of approximately 
$1,150. He held a security clearance during his military service, and he now seeks a 
clearance as a civilian. (Ex. 1, Ex. A; Tr. 45-48.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. under the guideline for drug involvement that in June 
2010 Applicant was found guilty of violating Articles 112A and 134 of the Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ).1 The charges specified in the SOR allegation are 
“Distribution of Schedule II Controlled Substance” and “Wrongful Use of 
                                            
1 Article 112 a. is titled: “Wrongful Use, Possession, Etc. of Controlled Substances.” Article 134 is titled 
“General Article” and reads: “Though not specifically mentioned in this chapter, all disorders and neglects 
to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces, all conduct of a nature to bring discredit 
upon the armed forces, and crimes and offenses not capital, of which persons subject to this chapter may 
be guilty, shall be taken cognizance of by a general, special or summary court-martial, according to the 
nature and degree of the offense, and shall be punished at the discretion of that court.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
Antidepressants without Prescription.”2 Additionally, at ¶ 2.a. the SOR cross alleges that 
Applicant’s drug involvement behavior raises security concerns under the personal 
conduct adjudicative guideline. (SOR.) 
 
 In his answer to the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a., Applicant stated the following: “I 
deny misuse of prescription drugs or use of an illegal drug. I admit I was found guilty at 
[name of military service] Court Martial proceeding [April] 2010.” In his answer to the 
allegation at SOR ¶ 2.a., Applicant stated: “I deny any conduct involving questionable 
judgment, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.” At his 
hearing, Applicant stated that he did not agree with the findings of the court-martial 
tribunal, but he did not dispute the court-martial process. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 46.)  
 
 In his testimony and in exhibits he asked to have entered in the record, Applicant 
provided the explanation that follows. In early 2008, during his military service, he 
injured his back when lifting luggage and loading it into an airplane. He reported his 
injury and subsequent pain. In January 2008, he was prescribed Percocet3 for back 
pain. (Tr. 46-49.) 
 
 Sometime in 2008 or 2009, Applicant became friends with a subordinate and 
coworker in his unit. The friend’s wife suffered from post-traumatic stress syndrome and 
was prescribed Percocet and the antidepressant Wellbutrin for her illness. Applicant 
frequently visited the individual and his wife, who lived on the military base where he 
was assigned, and they often invited him to join them for meals at their home. ( Ex. A; 
Tr. 33-34, 49-50.) 
 
 Applicant, his friend, and other individuals in his unit were assigned to military 
aircraft flights. These individuals were thoroughly briefed on the limits of their use of 
medication when they were in flying status. For example, military regulations required 
that an individual taking any kind of medication, including over-the-counter medication, 
had to consult with a flight surgeon to discuss the medication before carrying out flight 
duties. A service member on flying status who was prescribed and taking Percocet or 
an antidepressant drug would be assigned to “duty not involving/including flying” (DNIF). 
(Ex. L, 22-24.) 
 
 On February 2009, Applicant again consulted a physician for his back pain, and 
he was given a prescription for Percocet. He took the medication with him when he went 
to his friend’s home for dinner. He explained that he took the medication with him 
                                            
2 The transcript of the court-martial, offered as a post-hearing submission, identifies June 29, 2010, as 
the date of the staff judge advocate’s review of the trial judge’s decision, and his certification that the 
findings and sentence of the trial court were correct. 
 
3 Percocet, a synthetic narcotic comprised of acetaminophen and oxycodone, is listed as a Schedule II 
narcotic in 21 USC 812. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided information showing he had 
been prescribed Percocet in February 2007 for a dental issue. He also received prescriptions for Percocet 
in May 2007 and June 2007 from two other military medical providers. (Ex. K, Ex. L at 24.) 
  
 
4 
 
 
because he was required to take the medication with food. After supper, he did not take 
the pills with him when he left. He stated that he forgot the pills and left them behind 
inadvertently when he went home. He further explained: 
 
I did not know it at the time. And when I found out, I contacted them. 
Unfortunately there was a couple of days in between the time I got my pill 
bottle back and the time I left it there, because I went on a trip. I continued 
to [fly], so went on a trip and. . . .4 
 
(Ex. A, Ex. K, Tr. 34-35, 89-90.) 
 
 Applicant stated that when he received his pill bottle from his friend, the label had 
been torn off. Applicant stated that his friend told him he and his wife had taken some of 
his Percocet pills. Applicant did not report his friends’ illegal use of his prescription drug 
to his superiors. (Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 In late February or early March 2009, Applicant learned that his friend had either 
been arrested or was under investigation. Applicant believed that he might also be 
under investigation. He went to his commanding officer and requested an interview. At 
his hearing, Applicant stated that he told the commanding officer that his friend had 
taken some of his Percocet pills, without his permission, and he believed that was why 
he was being investigated. (Tr. 35-36, 61.) 
 
 Applicant stated that his commander advised him of his right to remain silent, 
brought in another officer as a witness, and then told Applicant he did not need to say 
anything else. Applicant, his commander, and the other officer then went to the military 
investigations unit, and he made a statement. (Ex. 3; Tr. 36-37, 53-55.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he told the investigators that he crushed one of his Percocet 
pills and snorted it in the company of his friend and his wife. He denied ever receiving 
the antidepressant Wellbutrin from his friend or his friend’s wife, and he denied ever 
using Wellbutrin. (Tr. 50-53.)  
 
 As a result of the investigation, Applicant was charged with three offenses under 
the UCMJ.  Under Article 92 of the UCMJ, he was charged with dereliction of duty on 
several occasions between December 31, 2008 and February 26, 2009, when he 
willfully failed to refrain from self-medicating, when on flight status, as it was his duty to 
do (Count One). Under Article 112a, he was charged with wrongfully distributing, on 
diverse occasions between December 31, 2008 and February 26, 2009, Percocet, a 
Schedule II controlled substance (Count Two). Under Article 134 of the UCMJ, he was 
charged with wrongful use of antidepressants without a prescription, conduct which was 
                                            
4 A military medical doctor reviewed Applicant’s medical record and reported: “Based on [Applicant’s] 
records, [he] was on flying status from the end of December 2008 to the end of February 2009. He was 
DNIF from the 23
rd
 of February 2009 and was returned to flying status on the 26
th
 of February.” (Ex. L, 22-
24.)  
 
5 
 
 
prejudicial to good order and discipline in the armed forces or of a nature to bring 
discredit upon the armed forces (Count Three). (Ex. 3.) 
 
 Applicant pleaded “Not Guilty” to all three charges. He was represented by 
military and civilian counsel. He was tried by special court-martial in April 2010. He was 
found not guilty on Count One. He was found guilty on Counts Two and Three, and he 
was sentenced to reduction in grade to E-5 and confinement for 40 days. Applicant’s 
access to classified information was suspended in October 2010. (Ex. 1, Ex. 3, Ex. L; 
Tr. 42-44.)  
 
    Applicant’s friend was also tried at a court-martial. He was convicted of wrongful 
use of drugs while in uniform,5 and sentenced to a dishonorable discharge. After his 
court-martial, he was granted immunity from further prosecution, with the exception of 
perjury, and he testified as a prosecution witness at Applicant’s court-martial. (Ex. L; Tr. 
51-52.)    
 
 At Applicant’s request, I admitted, without objection, a certified copy of the court- 
martial record. My purposes in admitting the court-martial document were to provide 
Applicant with an opportunity to provide additional information in mitigation and to 
assess Applicant’s credibility. (Tr. 82-85.) 
 
 At Applicant’s court-martial, his friend testified that he had crushed and snorted 
an antidepressant pill in Applicant’s presence. He then gave Applicant an 
antidepressant pill and Applicant did the same. The witness testified that he had seen 
Applicant crush and snort an antidepressant drug two or three times between the end of 
December 2008 and the end of February 2009. (Ex. L, 16-17.) 
 
 The friend’s wife was interviewed by authorized investigators in February 2009. 
In a signed, sworn statement, she told the investigators that she had been prescribed 
Wellbutrin for depression and Percocet for pain associated with surgery. She told the 
investigators that Applicant had provided her and her husband with Percocet on 10 to 
15 occasions. She also reported that she, her husband, and Applicant snorted 
Wellbutrin and Percocet together over a period of about six weeks. When asked at his 
hearing about the wife’s assertions, Applicant denied them. (Ex. 3; Tr. 58-60.) 
 
 Applicant’s commanding officer testified at the court-martial that Applicant told 
him he had provided his friend with Percocet, which he and the friend then crushed and 
snorted at the friend’s house. The officer who served as a witness when Applicant was 
interviewed by his commanding officer also testified as a witness at Applicant’s court- 
martial. The officer testified that he heard Applicant state that he and his friend crushed 
and snorted Applicant’s Percocet, which had been prescribed for Applicant. At his court- 
martial, Applicant testified that his commanding officer and the officer serving as a 
witness were incorrect in their statements. (Ex. L, 11-13, 28-29, 35.) 
                                            
5 The friend stated he was convicted of taking prescription medication without a prescription on more than 
one occasion. (Ex. L, at 16.) 
 
6 
 
 
  At his court-martial, Applicant stated that, in the company of his friend, he 
crushed and snorted Percocet between December 2008 and the end of February 2009. 
He also testified that on February 23 and February 25, 2009, he saw his friend snort 
something, but he did not know what it was. He denied distributing Percocet to his 
friend. (Ex. L, 35.) 
   
 Applicant’s friend was called as a rebuttal witness by the prosecution at the 
court-martial. He testified that Applicant distributed a Percocet pill to him on February 
26, 2009. Applicant then crushed the pill and the two men snorted it together. The friend 
also testified that on three other occasions, Applicant distributed to him a pill which he 
identified as his back pain medication. On those occasions, Applicant and the friend 
crushed and snorted the pills, which the friend stated had the same effect as the first 
Percocet they crushed and snorted together. The friend also testified that he saw 
Applicant use his wife’s antidepressants on two different occasions. At his hearing, 
Applicant denied sharing his Percocet pills with his friend and using his friend’s wife’s 
antidepressant, Wellbutrin. He stated that he crushed only one Percocet pill in the 
presence of his friends, and he snorted it himself. (Ex. L, 38-39, 50-53.) 
 
 Applicant’s commanding officer provided a letter of character reference for 
Applicant, which was entered into evidence at his court martial. The commanding officer 
praised Applicant’s service record of 22 years, his work ethic, and his strong technical 
skills. He recommended that, if possible, Applicant be retained on active duty. (Ex. G.) 
 
 Applicant submitted four letters of character references from officers under 
whose commands he had served. Three of the letters had been offered in support of 
Applicant at his court-martial. The letters praised Applicant’s work ethic, professional 
skills, and positive attitude. A fourth letter of support from a former commander 
recommended that Applicant’s security clearance eligibility be reinstated. (Ex. B, Ex. E, 
Ex. F, and Ex. H.) 
 
 Applicant also submitted two letters of character reference from his current 
civilian managers. Both managers stated that they believed Applicant to be trustworthy 
and honorable. They also praised his strong professional skills. (Ex. C, Ex. D.) 
 
 When he completed his e-QIP in February 2011, Applicant denied any illegal use 
or distribution of a controlled substance in the previous seven years. He also denied 
ever using a controlled substance illegally while possessing a security clearance. (Ex. 
1.)   
 
 Applicant submitted a signed statement, dated June 17, 2013, in which he 
declared his intent not to abuse drugs illegally in the future. In his statement, pursuant to 
¶ 26(b)(4) of Guideline H, he also acknowledged that any future illegal drug use by him 
would be grounds for automatic revocation of his security clearance. (Ex. J.) 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant submitted a toxicology report which showed that on April 15, 2009, his 
urine tested positive for the opiate oxymorphone. At that time, no positive results for   
antidepressants were detected. (Ex. K.) 
   
                                                         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
8 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.”  
 
At his court-martial and at his security clearance hearing, Applicant denied 
misuse of prescription drugs or use of an illegal drug.  When SOR allegations are 
controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient to 
prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. 
First, the Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events 
alleged in the SOR indeed took place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus 
between the existence of the established facts and events and a legitimate security 
concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009), (concurring and 
dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 
2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2009). 
The Government established a prima facie case by the evidence in the record. 
The record evidence establishes that Applicant was found guilty in a special court- 
martial of distribution of a controlled substance and wrongful use of antidepressants 
 
9 
 
 
without a prescription. Evidence in support of the charges against Applicant was 
provided by the Government in documentary evidence and by the court-martial 
transcript, offered into evidence by Applicant.  
 At his court-martial, Applicant was represented by military and civilian counsel. 
Although Applicant denied illegal use of a controlled substance, his friend’s wife 
provided a signed, sworn statement in which she reported that Applicant had provided 
her and her husband with Percocet on 10 to 15 occasions. She also reported that she, 
her husband, and Applicant snorted Wellbutrin and Percocet together over a period of 
about six weeks. The woman’s husband, who was Applicant’s friend, testified at 
Applicant’s court martial that he gave Applicant an antidepressant pill, which Applicant 
then crushed and snorted. The friend testified that he had seen Applicant crush and 
snort an antidepressant drug two or three times between the end of December 2008 
and the end of February 2009. When these events occurred, Applicant held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Two officers in Applicant’s military command testified at his court-martial. 
Applicant’s commanding officer testified that Applicant told him he had provided his 
friend with Percocet, which he and the friend then crushed and snorted at the friend’s 
house. Another officer, a major, who served as a witness when Applicant was 
interviewed by his commanding officer, also testified at the court-martial that he heard 
Applicant state that he and his friend crushed and snorted Applicant’s Percocet.   
In response to the Government’s prima facie case, Applicant then had the burden 
of proof to show mitigating conditions outweighed the disqualifying conditions that the 
Government argued should apply. Applicant denied the Guideline H allegations in the 
SOR, which recited the findings of the court-martial, but he provided no evidence to 
rebut or mitigate the allegations. He failed to provide evidence to corroborate his 
denials. 
 Applicant’s drug involvement casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. It also raises security concerns about his ability or willingness to comply 
with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug involvement 
raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(g). AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug 
abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(g) reads: “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of his security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. 
 
10 
 
 
The record establishes that Applicant’s last drug abuse occurred in 2009, more 
than four years ago. However, at his court-martial and at his hearing, Applicant denied 
any misuse of prescription drugs or use of illegal drugs. He provided no information to 
rebut or mitigate the allegations he denied. 
 
Applicant provided a statement of intent not to abuse drugs in the future, and 
acknowledged that if he did so, his security clearance would be automatically revoked. 
However, Applicant’s statement lacks credibility in the face of his ongoing denial of any 
past drug misuse or abuse and his failure to provide information to mitigate or rebut the 
Guideline H allegations.  
 
Applicant’s uncorroborated denials in the face of testimony by four credible 
witnesses are insufficient to establish that he has mitigated the charges of Guideline H 
drug involvement. I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) do not apply in mitigation 
to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b. alleges that Applicant’s distribution of a Schedule II controlled 
substance and his wrongful use of antidepressants without a prescription also raise 
security concerns under Guideline E. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied “any 
conduct involving questionable judgment, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations.” 
 
 Applicant served for 22 years in the military. He now seeks a security clearance 
as the employee of a government contractor. The record evidence establishes that 
Applicant misused his prescription drug Percocet by distributing it and snorting it with a 
friend. Additionally, the record evidence establishes that he also illegally used his 
friend’s wife’s Wellbutrin, a prescription antidepressant drug. In April 2010, after a court- 
martial, at which he was represented by counsel, testified, and was cross-examined, a 
military judge found against Applicant on two counts: violation of Article 112A of the 
UCMJ (distribution of a Schedule II controlled substance) and Article 134 (wrongful use 
of antidepressants without  a prescription). Applicant denied the allegations but provided 
no credible information in mitigation.  
  
 Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under Guideline E 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(e)(1), and 16(g). AG ¶ 16(c) reads: “credible 
 
11 
 
 
adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an 
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but, which, when considered as 
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities, which, if known, 
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” AG ¶ 16(g) 
reads: “association with persons involved in criminal activity.” 
 
  Several Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c) if “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(d) 
might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.”  
 
  Additionally, AG ¶¶ 17(e), 17(f), and 17(g) might apply in this case. AG ¶ 17(e) 
reads: “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(f) reads: “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” AG ¶ 17(g) reads: 
“association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under 
circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations.” 
  
  During his military service and as a federal contractor, Applicant was entrusted 
with classified and sensitive information. In 2008 and 2009, he chose to become 
involved in the illegal use of prescription drugs with a military coworker and his wife. 
Their conduct involved criminal activity, impacted their professional and community 
standing, and exposed them to the possibility of exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
After a military investigation, Applicant was charged with distribution of a Schedule II 
controlled substance and wrongful use of antidepressants without prescription. 
 
  He was tried on these charges in a military court-martial. At trial, Applicant was 
represented by military and civilian counsel. He denied the charges. Four witnesses, 
including the two individuals with whom he used drugs illegally and two officers in his 
command, corroborated the charges. He was found guilty by a military judge. His 
security clearance was suspended.  
 
  The SOR in this case alleges the charges for which Applicant was tried at court- 
martial and found guilty. At his hearing, Applicant denied the allegations but provided no 
credible information in mitigation. 
 
12 
 
 
  Applicant’s personal conduct, which involved illegal use of prescription drugs and 
failure to follow rules and regulations, was not minor, so remote in time, or so 
infrequent, nor did it occur under such unique circumstances, that it was unlikely to 
recur and therefore did not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. (AG 17(c).)  
 
  The investigative record contained a signed sworn statement from one of the 
individuals with whom Applicant used prescription drugs illegally. That individual 
identified Applicant as the person who supplied her and her husband with Percocet, a 
Schedule II controlled drug. The woman’s husband, a co-worker of Applicant’s, testified 
that Applicant gave him Percocet and illegally used his wife’s antidepressant, a 
prescription drug. Applicant’s commanding officer, and another officer in his command, 
testified that Applicant stated in their presence that he crushed and snorted Percocet 
with his co-worker. The military trial court found these four witnesses to be credible and 
reliable. Applicant, who was represented by a military counsel and a civilian counsel, 
offered no credible evidence in rebuttal or mitigation. 
 
  While he apparently no longer associates with the coworker and his wife, 
Applicant has never acknowledged his illegal drug use and criminal activity, and he 
failed to demonstrate that he had taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate the 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress caused by his personal conduct 
behavior. It is not clear that his behavior will not recur. I conclude, therefore, that AG ¶¶ 
17(c), 17(d), 17(e), 17(f) and 17(g) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
13 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a respected military 
record, and he is considered to be a valued employee by his current and former 
colleagues. However, Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his 
illegal drug use and personal conduct. At his security clearance hearing, Applicant 
denied responsibility for illegal use of prescription drugs. 
 
 The military branch in which Applicant served made serious allegations against 
him. Those charges were adjudicated in an investigation which resulted in a military 
court-martial trial. Applicant was represented by counsel; he testified and was cross-
examined. The presiding judge returned a verdict convicting Applicant of two of the 
three charges alleged. After reviewing the judge’s verdict, a senior military officer 
entered a final judgment and sentence. Applicant was sentenced to a demotion in rank 
and 40 days of confinement. While Applicant denied any wrongdoing, he failed to rebut 
or mitigate the allegations, which raised security concerns about his drug involvement, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules. 
  
After a thorough review of the evidence in the record of this case, and after 
carefully observing Applicant and assessing his demeanor and credibility, I conclude 
that Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the drug involvement 
and personal conduct adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:           AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:                      Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
                                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
