1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-10232
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 22, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On December 3, 2012, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD)
Directive 5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she requested that her case
be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)  On May 2, 2013,
Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A complete copy of the file
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department
Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits. (Items 1-7.) Applicant was given the
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.
A response was due on June 21, 2013. Applicant did not submit a response. The case
was assigned to this Administrative Judge on July 29, 2013.
2
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 41 years old. She is not married and has one daughter. Applicant
graduated from high school in 1990. From November 1996 to April 2006, Applicant was
employed full-time as a security officer for a private company. From April 2006 to the
present, she has been employed full-time as a Security Officer by a defense contractor,
and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the
defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 12 allegations (1.a. through 1.l.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be
discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for an overdue account in the amount
of $7,701 for a judgement that was entered against her in August 2008. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  I do not find that this debt has
been resolved or reduced. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $343. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $135.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $261.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $234.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $215.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
3
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $90.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $228.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $360.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $147.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,134.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but wrote, “Insurance should have paid.”
(Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and owing and has not been resolved or
reduced in any manner. 
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $93.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I  find that this debt is still due and
owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
Applicant wrote in her RSOR that because of “the death of her father, [she] was
unable to proceed with credit counseling to correct [her] debts at the time.” She also
indicated that she was responsible for the cost of his funeral. (Item 2.) Applicant
provided no date for her father’s death, but she indicated in her Security Clearance
Application that her father was not deceased as of June 11, 2011. (Item 3.) Since all of
her overdue debts listed on the SOR, totaling approximately $12,000, were incurred
between 2006 and 2010, the debts had to have been incurred before her father’s death.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
4
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s explanation of the death of her father as part the reason for her financial
difficulties could potentially make this mitigation condition applicable, although no
evidence was submitted to establish specifically what debts could be attributed to this
event, since all of the debts seemed to have become overdue prior to her father’s death.
 According to Item 3, Applicant has worked full-time and continuously from 1996
until the present, yet no evidence was introduced to establish that Applicant has
resolved, reduced, or even attempted to resolve any of her debts, even those smaller
debts, four of which were listed as less than $150. Therefore, I do not find that Applicant
has acted responsibly, and this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶  20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has not
“initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”
Finally, I do not find that any other mitigating condition applies to this case. Therefore, I
find Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
6
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has made any attempt to resolve the past-due debts listed on
the SOR, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns  under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.l.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
