 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13495 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 22, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had four delinquent debts totaling $13,198, identified on the Statement 
of Reasons (SOR). Appellant failed to produce sufficient documentation that her debts 
have been addressed or are otherwise satisfied. She has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on March 5, 2013 (Answer). In 
her Answer, Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 21, 
2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by 
Applicant on June 3, 2013. She was afforded 30 days to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not submit 
any information within the time. The case was assigned to me on July 29, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 27 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2010. She has 
been working for her current employer since January 2011. She is unmarried and has 
no children. (Item 5.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified four delinquent debts totaling $13,198. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, 
She denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.d. (Answer; Item 5, Item 7, Item8.)  
 
Applicant attributes her debts to periods of unemployment. She listed on her 
security clearance application that she was unemployed in July 2006, in September to 
December 2008, and again in January 2010. (Item 5.)  
 
Her debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the amount of $2,519 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). This debt has been delinquent since 2009. It remains 
unsatisfied. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.)  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the amount of $1,718 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant indicated that she used this credit card to pay for 
personal expenses and make truck payments. Applicant presented a settlement offer 
from the creditor and an account statement dated December 29, 2012, which showed a 
payment of $171.88 to this creditor. The statement also listed “pending” payments on a 
monthly basis from, January 15, 2013, through November 15, 2013. However, no 
documentation was submitted to establish the pending payments were made 
successfully. It remains unsatisfied. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent automobile loan in the amount of $8,211 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c). It has been past due since 2009. The vehicle was voluntarily 
repossessed in January 2009, but Applicant agreed that she owed the remainder after 
the sale of the vehicle. It remains unsatisfied. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent consumer account in the amount of $750 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d). It has been past due since 2009. Applicant denied this 
allegation because she stated she did not recognize this account and did not know how 
the debt was incurred. However, this she has not contested this debt and it appears on 
her most recent credit report. This debt remains unsatisfied. (Answer; Item 7; Item 8.)  
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicated she had $726 available after 
paying her monthly living expenses. She presented no evidence that she has utilized 
credit counseling services or professional services to help with her financial situation. 
(Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of her professional 
performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. She submitted 
no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
 
4 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since at least 2009, when she became 
delinquent on several of her accounts. She has failed to present any evidence that she 
is addressing the debts in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant indicated that her financial problems were the result of being 
unemployed. However, she failed to show she acted responsibly once she found a new 
job. She has been employed with her present company since January 2011. Further, 
she has $726 available after meeting her monthly expenses, but is not utilizing those 
funds to repay her financial obligations. Therefore, I cannot conclude that future 
financial delinquencies are unlikely to occur. Her financial issues are recent and 
ongoing, as she has failed to address the debts identified in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant explained that she incurred debts as a 
result of unemployment. This was a circumstance beyond her control. However, she 
identified on her security clearance application that she was unemployed in July 2006, 
in September to December 2008, and again in January 2010. The duration and impact 
of the unemployment on her financial situation is unclear. She failed to show that she 
has addressed her debts since accepting full-time employment in 2011. To be fully 
applicable AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual demonstrate that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence that she has addressed her 
consumer accounts.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial counseling. Further, there 
is little indication that Applicant’s four delinquent accounts are being resolved or are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her delinquent 
consumer debts. She presented no evidence of any recent payments or progress 
toward the settlement of her consumer debts. The record fails to establish that any 
payments have been made on her consumer debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that she was in the process of 
formally disputing any of her debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant failed to address $13,198 in delinquencies. While she has experienced 
periods of unemployment, she failed to demonstrate any significant efforts to repay her 
delinquent debt after she was hired into her current position. Accordingly, continuation 
of these circumstances is highly likely, and the potential for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
