 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14246 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 2, 2013, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on May 20, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on June 18, 2013. As of August 22, 2013, he had not responded. 
The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2013. The Government exhibits included in 
the FORM are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
U.S. military from 1974 until he was honorably discharged in 1986. He had a security 
clearance in the military, but it lapsed when he was discharged. He is a high school 
graduate. He married in 1974 and divorced in 1989. He married again in 2010. He has 
two adult and two minor children. He also has four minor stepchildren.1   
 
 Applicant worked for the same employer from 1986 until he was laid off in May 
2010. He worked for a construction staffing company from May 2010 until he was hired 
by his current employer in May 2011.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts and unpaid judgments. All of the debts and 
judgments appear on at least one credit report. Applicant denied owing the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c (furniture store - $1,792) and the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l (cable 
company - $470). He stated the two accounts were paid. He stated that he was making 
payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f (collection company/bank - $3,975) and the 
judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($699), 1.d (credit union - $8,783), and 1.k ($212). He 
admitted owing the remaining debts, which total about $11,492.3 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to being laid off in May 2010. 
However, according to the credit reports, many of the debts became delinquent before 
he was laid off. The debt to a credit union, which formed the basis of the $8,783 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, became delinquent in 2009. The $3,975 debt to a 
collection company on behalf of a bank (SOR ¶ 1.f) became delinquent in 2009. The 
$212 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k was filed in March 2010. The $6,066 debt to a 
financial institution (SOR ¶ 1.j) became delinquent in 2007.4 
 
 Applicant listed a number of delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for National 
security Positions (SF 86) that he submitted in June 2011. He discussed his financial 
problems with the investigator for his background investigation in September 2011. He 
responded to DOHA interrogatories in February 2013.5 DOHA asked: 
 
Please explain below what you have done to resolve your debts. If you 
have made payments on the debts cited below, please provide 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 7.  
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Items 3-7.  
 
4 Items 4-7.  
 
5 Items 4, 7.  
 
3 
 
documentary proof, such as copies of cancelled checks, copies of 
money orders, recent invoices or statements reflecting a current 
balance and a recent payment, and or other correspondence 
received from either the collection agency or the original creditors. 
Please also list any other delinquent debts and provide documents as to 
what you are doing to resolve the debts.6 (emphasis in original) 
 
In response to the interrogatories, Applicant wrote that two debts were paid off and that 
he was making biweekly payments on three debts.7 He did not submit any 
documentation of payments.  
 
 Department Counsel argued in the brief attached to the FORM:  
 
Applicant states that he has paid off two debts totaling approximately 
$2,262, and that he is making payments on four additional debts. 
However, Applicant has yet to provide documentary proof of payments on 
any of the debts. 
 
Department Counsel later stated that “he has not provided any documentary proof that 
he has resolved or attempted to resolve any of his debts,” and “Applicant has provided 
no proof of payments or efforts to resolve his outstanding debts.”  
 
 Despite the notification in the DOHA interrogatories and the FORM, Applicant 
submitted no documentary evidence establishing payments toward any of his delinquent 
debts and unpaid judgments. There is no indication that Applicant received financial 
counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
6 Item 7.  
 
7 Item 7.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was laid off work in May 2010 after 24 years with the same employer. 
He worked for a construction staffing company from May 2010 until he was hired by his 
current employer in May 2011. Applicant attributed his financial problems to being laid 
off. The layoff constitutes a condition that was beyond his control. However, many of his 
debts became delinquent before he was laid off, and he has been working for his 
current employer for more than two years.  
 
 Applicant states that he paid two debts and that he is making payments on four 
debts. Despite repeated comments about the need for documentary evidence, he 
submitted nothing to corroborate his assertions. The Appeal Board has held that “it is 
reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 
2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that they rose 
predominantly from conditions that were beyond his control; that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His 
 
6 
 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the mitigating conditions are 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, the limited 
information in the record has not convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order 
to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
