 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14570 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 20, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 19, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on July 10, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
 
2 
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through D. The record was left open until July 24, 2013, for Applicant to 
submit matters. He timely submitted documents that were marked as AE E through K. 
All of the proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 17, 2013.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement in 
Paragraph E3.1.8 of the Directive.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old computer engineering technician who works for a 
defense contractor. He has been working for his current employer since September 
2010. He graduated from high school in 2004 and attended college for about two years. 
He has never been married and has no children. He has held a security clearance since 
2009 without incident.2  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had five delinquent debts totaling $17,847. In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact.3 
 
 From about 2007 to 2009, Applicant lived with a woman. During that period, she 
was unemployed and he supported her.  He took out a credit card in his name and let 
her use it. He traveled often in his job, and she would use the credit card while he was 
gone. She was responsible for the credit card charges in the largest alleged debt (SOR 
¶ 1.d). In 2010, Applicant was furloughed from his job for 70 days and collected 
unemployment during that period. Each debt is addressed separately below.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $638. This cable television service account 
was placed for collection in August 2008. Applicant provided a collection company letter 
dated July 5, 2013, reflecting that this account has been paid.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $274. This clothing store account had a date 
of first delinquency/date of last activity of February 2008. Applicant provided a collection 
company email dated July 1, 2013, reflecting that this account has been paid.6 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13. 
2 Tr. at 6-7, 30, 43-44; GE 1, 6.  
 
3 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 31-32, 37-38, 41, 54-55, 57; GE 4, 5. 
 
5 Tr. at 34, 53; GE 2, 3, 4; AE C, F. 
  
6 Tr. at 34-35; GE 2, 3, 4; AE D, G. 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $1,850. This account had a date of first 
delinquency/date of last activity of October 2007. Applicant provided a collection 
company letter dated July 5, 2013, reflecting that he entered into a settlement 
agreement for this debt. Under that agreement, he will pay $250 each month until he 
pays $2,250. He made the first $250 payment on July 3, 2013, and testified that he will 
continue to make those payments.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $13,611. This account had a date of first 
delinquency/date of last activity of September 2006. Applicant testified that he set up a 
payment arrangement for this debt. He provided a collection company letter dated July 
1, 2013, reflecting that he made a $200 payment toward this debt.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $1,474. This was a medical debt for expenses 
that were not covered by Applicant’s medical insurance. He provided a bank statement 
reflecting that he made a $100 payment on July 16, 2013, toward this debt.9 
 
 When Applicant was furloughed in 2010, he did not realize that income taxes 
were not taken out of his unemployment compensation. After he filed his 2010 income 
tax return, he learned that he owed back taxes. His past-due tax issue was resolved 
when $752 of his 2012 tax refund was withheld.10 
 
 In his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated July 
23, 2009, Applicant disclosed that some of the alleged debts were delinquent. In Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) interviews on August 8, 2009, and September 15, 
2011, Applicant was questioned about those debts. In the latter interview, he stated that 
his delinquent debts had not been paid because he had not been receiving steady work 
assignments from his employer. At that time, he indicated that he intended to pay the 
accounts. When asked at the hearing why he just recently began making payments on 
the delinquent debts, he stated that he had been traveling outside the country “pretty 
much nonstop” for the past 12 months. He also testified that he was home about three 
or four weeks in the past ten months and stated, “It hasn’t been high on my priority list 
to take care of those debts when I come home before I leave to go back overseas 
again.” When asked if he had the resources to pay the debts, he stated: 
 
I’ve had some resources set aside for quite some time now. I just haven’t 
gotten around to getting in contact with these credit agencies to make the 
initial payments. With this jeopardizing my job I had to go ahead and use 
the funds that I have started saving over the past few years to start paying 
these debts.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
7 Tr. at 32-33, 52-54; GE 2, 3, 4; AE B, H. 
 
8 Tr. at 35-38, 54-56; GE 2, 3, 4; AE I. 
 
9 Tr. at 38-40, 56; AE K. 
 
10 Tr. at 41-44, 54; GE 5; AE J.  
 
4 
 
During his last OPM interview, Applicant also stated that he has not sought financial 
counseling or debt consolidation services. However, he testified that his mother is 
providing him financial advice.11 
 
   In responding to interrogatories on February 8, 2013, Applicant stated that he 
had not made payment arrangements or was not making payments on the alleged 
debts. In that response, he also stated: 
 
I’ve had no contact with any creditor/debt purchaser due to the fact I’ve 
been working overseas and [had] no way of communication with creditors 
besides the ones included here within.  
 
The creditor communications provided with his response to the interrogatories were 
attempts to collect the delinquent debts. In that response, he also provided a personal 
financial statement (PFS) that reflected his total net monthly income was $3,150, and 
his total monthly expenses were $3,554, which left him a negative net monthly 
remainder of $403. The PFS listed the alleged debts, but did not provide for any 
payments toward them.12 
 
  Applicant presented a letter of reference from the chief executive officer (CEO)/ 
president of his company. The CEO indicated that Applicant had a great work ethic and 
believed he was trustworthy.13  
 
 Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 44-45, 49-52; GE 4, 6. 
 
12 Tr. at 46-47; GE 4. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. At least four of those debts were 
delinquent for four to six years. His furlough for 70 days in 2010 was a condition beyond 
his control; however, he has not established that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He initially claimed that he did not take any action earlier to resolve the 
debts because he had unsteady work assignments and then claimed he did not do so 
because he had been out of the country for significant periods. His explanations for the 
delays are not convincing. He was questioned about the debts in OPM interviews in 
2009 and 2011 and was sent interrogatories about them in 2013. Even though he had 
known that these debts raised security concerns for years, he failed to take any action 
on them until a week or two before the hearing. His procrastination in dealing with these 
debts does not demonstrate the reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment expected 
of an individual who is granted a security clearance.14   
 
 Although Applicant recently has resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and 
recently made payments on the remaining debts, he has failed to show a meaningful 
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 01-21030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (Given Applicant's history of 
financial problems, the sizable nature of the indebtedness, and the fact that the debts at issue had been 
incurred years earlier, but virtually no effort had been made to resolve them until the eve of hearing or just 
after the hearing--well after the invocation of the security clearance process and the issuance of the SOR 
--it was not arbitrary or capricious for the Administrative Judge to decide that the evidence was insufficient 
for him to conclude that Applicant's efforts to otherwise resolve her debts warranted application of [the 
mitigating condition that was the predecessor to AG ¶ 20(d)]) 
 
 
7 
 
track record of payments. He made those recent payments because his security 
clearance was in jeopardy. I am not convinced that he will continue to make payments 
on the unresolved debts in the future.  
 
 From the evidence presented, I am unable to find that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply. 
AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a valued employee. Nonetheless, insufficient evidence has been 
presented to establish that his financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. In his PFS submitted in February 2013, he reported a negative monthly cash 
flow. Most importantly, Applicant failed to show that he has acted in a responsible and 
prudent manner in handling his financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
