 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXXXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-12835 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 8, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing/Security Clearance Application (e-QIP/SF 86). On February 
6, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 21, 2013. He answered 
the SOR in writing on March 7, 2013, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on or 
about March 12, 2013. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 30, 2013, 
and I received the case assignment on May 9, 2013. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on June 7, 2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 24, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through M, without objection. Applicant had 
until July 15, 2013, to submit additional documents concerning his delinquent debts. He 
did not submit anything. The record closed on July 15,,2013. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 10, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.d, and 1.g of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h to 1.l of the SOR. He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 51-years old and has seven children, five of whom are adults. The 
two oldest children were from his first marriage. Applicant is a retired military member 
who had a security clearance while on active duty. From 2004 to 2008 Applicant worked 
as a security specialist for the military. He was laid off when the company was bought 
by another organization. He was unemployed from December 2008 until May 2011, 
having only his retirement income to support his family. He works now for an insurance 
company on military veterans policies. A defense contractor is sponsoring him for a 
security clearance because of a network security position it has available. Applicant 
may also take a position with another insurance company, for which he would not need 
a security clearance. He also volunteers at the local Veterans Hospital in various 
capacities, including as the curator of the local military history museum. (Tr. 19-22, 24, 
26, 34, 35; Exhibits 1, 6, A to M) 
 
 The SOR lists 12 delinquent debts, totaling $79,521.90. Some of the 
delinquencies began in 2008 and continue up to the present day. He admitted owing 
three delinquent debts enumerated in Subparagraphs 1.b (a telephone bill for $624), 1.d 
(a bank debt for $11,628), and in 1.g (a student loan for $21,779). They total $36,393. 
 
Applicant denies the remaining nine delinquent debts totaling $43,128.90. Those 
debts include a judgment (Subparagraph 1.a for $2,986), a cable television debt 
(Subparagraph 1.c for $120), a department store debt (Subparagraph 1.e for $855), a 
collection debt (Subparagraph 1.f for $175), a telephone bill (Subparagraph 1.h for 
$177), a mortgage loan in foreclosure (Subparagraph 1.i for $36,745), a city tax 
(Subparagraph 1.j for $2,986.34), another tax owed to the same city (Subparagraph 1.k 
for $1,246.56), and a homeowners association fee (Subparagraph 1.l for $200).   (Tr. 
22-24, 26, 28, 29, 42-46; SOR; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 None of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR are resolved. Applicant claims the 
$175 debt is paid (Subparagraph 1.f), but has no documentary proof to show that 
action. The tax debts resulted from city income tax that Applicant says his former 
employer paid to the wrong city. He objects to paying the debt because of the 
employer’s mistake. He also feels his city of residence deceived him when a staff 
 
3 
 
 
member asked him to sign a blank form he assumed was a power of attorney but was 
really an amended tax return. The taxes are unpaid. Applicant has not paid the $2,986 
judgment because he asserts he never received a copy of it. He refuses to pay any debt 
he does not think is legitimate. Applicant also claims he does not have the income to 
pay any of these debts and that the creditors will not “work with him” to resolve them for 
less than the full value or allow him to pay on installment payment plans. In addition to 
his unemployment from February 2009 to May 2011, Applicant was unemployed for 
nine months after a layoff in 2003. His house mortgage was foreclosed and Applicant 
moved from that building into an apartment. (Tr. 22-65; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
  Applicant submitted 12 character reference letters. All authors of the letters write 
about the strong moral character, reliability, capability, intelligence, and trustworthiness 
of Applicant. Several letters acknowledge Applicant was unemployed for three years. 
(Exhibits A to M) 
 
 Applicant has not sought any financial counseling. Nor has he obtained any such 
advice or guidance to attempt to resolve his debts. (Tr. 79) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Three conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant accumulated $79,521.90 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present 
time that remains unpaid. Applicant has 12 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They 
include the two delinquent city income tax debts, which Applicant objects to as unfair.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
 circumstances; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Applicant has not paid any of the debts enumerated in the SOR. He claims not to 
have the income for the past three years to repay the debts. His periods of 
unemployment resulted in reliance on his military retired pay for an income, insufficient 
to repay the debts. He will only resolve the debts when he has sufficient income to do 
so. There is no proof from Applicant that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances to resolve his debts. He did not submit any documents to demonstrate 
his attempts to resolve the debts. Applicant did not dispute any debts in writing, and was 
unable to submit proof of such action.  
 
Applicant disputes the local income tax debt. He contends his former employer 
paid the wrong city. Then, his residence city could not or would not obtain the money 
from the first payee municipality. Applicant testified that the city employees where he 
lives deceived him and instead of a power of attorney to be used to rectify the situation, 
it was an amended tax return he signed without reading. Applicant did not submit any 
documents to show this alleged deception or that the local judge who entered the tax 
judgment against him acted illegally. There is a presumption of regularity and legality on 
the actions of the municipal officials that Applicant did not overcome with any credible 
evidence.  
 
Applicant’s reason for justifying a security clearance is his past honorable military 
service, his good character, and the character references he submitted. None of these 
explanations are sufficient to overcome his lack of action on his substantial debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply because of Applicant’s lack of proof that he acted 
responsibly in attempting to avoid or repay his debts when his income was insufficient to 
repay them. The same result occurs under AG ¶ 20 (e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred debts, which he 
was financially unable to pay. He did not appear from his statements at the hearing to 
have made continuous and diligent efforts to resolve the debts in the past few years. 
Nor did he engage in a dispute process for most of the debts. He claimed he tried to 
resolve his city income tax debts but was deceived and denied due process by the local 
taxing authorities. He did not offer any documents to demonstrate his efforts to contest 
these taxes that he claimed his former employer paid to the incorrect city. Applicant was 
not persuasive in his presentation about these issues. He failed to meet his burden of 
proof that any of the mitigating conditions should apply. Applicant did retire from the 
military after 20 years of honorable service. Since then he has been employed in 
professional positions.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
 
   
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
