KEYWORD: Guideline d; Guideline E
DIGEST:  The Judge denied Applicant a clearance based on the conduct in the SOR.  Other
conduct was considered in the limited context of mitigation. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-13664.a1
DATE: 08/15/2013
DATE: August 15, 2013
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-13664
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq.
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 24, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 6, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge improperly raised
security concerns not alleged in the SOR; whether the Judge substituted a credibility determination
for record evidence; whether the Judge erred in his analysis of the pertinent mitigating conditions;
and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for his current employer since the early 1980s.  He has held security
clearances since the early 1970s.  He was denied access to sensitive compartmented information
(SCI) in the late 2000s.
The allegations in the SOR were based on answers Applicant provided to another
Government agency (AGA) in connection with a polygraph examination.  The allegations pertained
to Applicant’s having viewed sexually-explicit images of children and to his having viewed sexually
explicit images on a work computer.  The Judge cited to several documents that described
Applicant’s answers to questions about this conduct.
A 2005 “polygraph report” described an admission by Applicant that he had on his home
computer 500 to 1000 images of females who were 11 to 17 years of age.  He stated that he would
download images of sexual acts regardless of the ages of the participants.  He was embarrassed to
admit that he liked girls under 18. 
In 2008, Applicant submitted to an interview with agents of AGA.  GE 2 contains a summary
of this interview.  Applicant is reported to have stated that he had viewed pornography every two
weeks since 2002, downloading the images onto disks.  He estimated that he had about 12,000
images of underage girls on disks.   
In 2009, Applicant provided a written response to AGA’s proposal to deny him access to
SCI.  In that document he stated that the estimated number of underage females was “over
inclusive.”  Decision at 4.  He stated that the images were not pornographic if they did not show
anything sexually provocative.  He denied having stated that he liked girls under age 18.  He also
stated that 12,000 represented the total number of pornographic images on his disks, not the number
involving underage females.  He asserted that the newsgroups through which he acquired access to
pornography did not identify the ages of the participants but that he did not download files that
1GE 4 is an 8-page affidavit, written in longhand and signed by Applicant.  Applicant wrote the following: “At
the time there was no company policy against such viewings.  I viewed pictures of supermodels clothed and topless on
my non-government work computer after business hours.  I do not recall the time frame or frequency of my viewings.
I viewed these images because I wanted to see what was available . . . I viewed the topless images by myself in my office
and showed some to a fellow [company] employee.”  GE 4 at 2.  Compare with GE 3, Response to Proposed Denial of
SCI Access, executed nearly 20 months earlier: “I described to the investigator a work assignment I once had involving
searching a particular collection of evidence.  My [G]overnment sponsor was involved in collecting and then analyzing
data from certain foreign sources.  My office wanted to determine whether additional money should be allocated to
identifying sexually explicit images or to identifying commercial products.  Therefore, my assignment involved looking
at a set of files to see what types of video and still images it contained.  As it happens, I did not find any sexually explicit
images in the evidence collection.”  GE 3 at 298.
  
3
implied “youthful content.”  Decision at 5.  The Judge stated that he had evaluated Applicant’s
explanations carefully and did not find them credible.  
The Judge quoted other statements by Applicant regarding this matter.  In 2008, Applicant
advised AGA that he was not sure that he had any images of underage girls.  At the hearing, he
testified to his belief that he had no pictures of females under 18, although some may have been
younger than he originally thought.  The Judge stated, “I am not persuaded by Applicant’s
explanations that he did not view nude and sexually-explicit pictures of underage females at home
on the internet.”  Decision at 5.
Concerning allegations that Applicant had viewed sexually explicit photographs on his work
computer, the Judge cited to the 2008 interview, in which Applicant stated that he had done so from
1999 to 2002.  Applicant stated that he did so from a half hour to an hour during his work shift.  He
stated that he never viewed pornography on a Government computer except once.
In 2009, Applicant stated that, at the time he viewed such material at work, there was no
company policy prohibiting such conduct.  He stopped doing so when his company instituted a
policy prohibiting viewing sexually oriented web sites.  At the hearing, he testified that he did not
remember telling AGA in 2008 about the frequency with which he viewed sex sites while at work.
The Judge noted other inconsistent statements by Applicant.  In 2005, Applicant stated that
he viewed sexually-oriented magazine sites about 10 times from his work computer.  At the hearing,
he stated that he had done so only once.  In 2009, in his response to AGA, he stated that this one
time was duty-related.  At the hearing, Applicant was cross-examined about GE 4, an affidavit that
he had executed in 2010.  In this document, he stated the images he viewed were of clothed or
topless models and that he had viewed them by himself or with other employees.  When confronted
with this document, Applicant testified that he did not recall making either statement.1 
Applicant’s wife testified at the hearing.  She stated that Applicant had spent a lot of time
on the computer and would turn off the screen when she entered the room.  She surmised that he was
viewing sexually explicit material even though she never saw it.  She believed him when he stated
to her that he did not view sexually explicit images of children.
4
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that the record contained substantial evidence supporting both
allegations in the SOR.  Regarding Guideline D, the Judge stated that Applicant’s 2005 and 2008
interviews had not been satisfactorily rebutted.  The Judge cited to evidence that Applicant
downloaded images of children to disks and that he turned off the computer screen when his wife
came into the room.  He stated that the record demonstrated that Applicant viewed sexually explicit
images on his work computer from 1999 to 2002 and that he showed the images to other employees.
In doing these things, Applicant showed poor judgment.  Concerning Applicant’s case for
mitigation, the Judge noted that the record contained no evidence that Applicant had viewed sexual
images of underage girls since 2008 or that he had viewed sexual material on his work computer
since 2002.  
However, the extensive number of explanations minimizing or denying any
conscious viewing of nude and sexually-explicit pictures of underage girls and his
discrepant positions about viewing sexually-explicit pictures of adults on his work
computer raise continuing security concerns about his judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness.  AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(c) are not applicable.  Decision at 10.   
The Judge also concluded that Applicant’s misconduct raised concerns under Guideline E
that he could be vulnerable to pressure.  Regarding mitigation, the Judge stated that the misconduct
was not minor.  He also stated that Applicant may not have been completely forthright with his wife.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge explained in detail why he concluded that Applicant’s
presentation at the hearing had not been credible.  He stated, for example, that Applicant’s
contention that he had overstated the extent of his viewing of child pornography was not reasonable
and that Applicant’s claim that he could not remember making some of the inculpatory statements
“cannot be overlooked.”  Decision at 13.  The Judge stated that, viewing all of the facts and
circumstances in light of the whole-person concept, Applicant had failed to mitigate the concerns
arising from his misconduct.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the statement in the Analysis to the effect that his having minimized
or denied the misconduct in question raised security concerns about his judgement and reliability.
Applicant contends that in making this statement, the Judge based his adverse decision on conduct
not alleged in the SOR.    
The Directive requires that an applicant’s clearance may not be denied or revoked unless he
or she is given a written statement of reasons and an opportunity to respond.  An applicant is entitled
to reasonable time in which to prepare his or her case.  Directive, Enclosure 1, SECTION 3.  The
SOR may be amended at a hearing by the Judge sua sponte, or on motion by either of the parties.
When a SOR is amended, the Judge may grant a request for additional time in which to prepare.
Directive ¶ E3.1.17.  Applicant notes that the Judge did not amend the SOR and argues that, as a
consequence, his treatment of Applicant’s various explanations violated the requirements of the
Directive.
2“[A] Judge may consider non-alleged conduct for such issues as an applicant’s credibility; his evidence in
mitigation; the extent of an applicant’s rehabilitation; the applicability of a particular provision of the Directive; or for
a whole-person analysis.” 
 
5
In presenting this assignment of error, Applicant relies on a previous decision by the Appeal
Board.  ISCR Case No. 03-08625 (App. Bd. Sep. 29, 2005) addressed a Judge’s having predicated
an adverse decision on his negative assessment of the applicant’s credibility.  The case involved
allegations of Drug Involvement.  The Judge concluded that the applicant had succeeded in
mitigating these allegations.  However, he went on to say that evidence that the applicant had been
dishonest with various persons, including his wife, a social worker, and a DSS agent, precluded a
favorable decision.  Dishonest conduct was not alleged in the SOR.  We held that the Judge had
committed reversible error, in that he had based his decision not on the allegations contained in the
SOR but on matters extraneous to it.  Although conduct evidencing a lack of honesty may properly
be raised under Guideline E, the Judge did not amend the SOR to conform to such evidence.
“Without such a amendment, it was not permissible to render an unfavorable decision relying on
Guideline E or the conduct normally covered by the Guideline.”  ISCR Case No. 03-08625 at 4.
Applicant contends that the Judge in the case presently under consideration committed a similar
error.
We have considered Applicant’s argument in light of the record as a whole.  When reviewing
a Judge’s decision, we do not consider individual sentences in isolation.  Rather, we consider them
in light of the decision in its entirety.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-05850 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 12,
2013).  We conclude that the circumstances of Applicant’s case are different from those of the
earlier one upon which he relies.  In that case, the Judge had found the concerns raised in the SOR
had been mitigated, but he went on to enter adverse findings based on conduct not alleged.  In
Applicant’s case, however, the Judge did not conclude that the SOR concerns had been mitigated.
Rather, he concluded that they had not been mitigated and discussed Applicant’s problematic
statements in explaining why.  In a DOHA proceeding, the applicant bears the burden of persuasion
as to mitigation; and conduct, such as inconsistent or meretricious statements, even though not
alleged in a SOR, may be considered in evaluating whether the applicant has met his or her burden.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07219 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012).2  Contrary to ISCR Case No. 03-
08625, the Judge in Applicant’s case did not treat Applicant’s inconsistent explanations as a separate
basis for denying him a clearance.  We interpret the Judge’s language to mean that the concerns
raised by Applicant’s alleged and proven misconduct continued, that is, remained unmitigated, at
the close of the record.  Although the Judge could have phrased a portion of his analysis differently,
reading the Decision as a whole, we conclude that he evaluated Applicant’s inconsistent statements
in their proper context.  To the extent that there is error in the Judge’s phraseology, it did not likely
exert an influence on the outcome of the case and, therefore, was harmless.  
Applicant alleges that the Judge substituted a credibility determination for record evidence.
We defer to a Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 11-
08546 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 27, 2013).  However, in the absence of record evidence a Judge’s mere
disbelief in an applicant’s statements is an insufficient basis to find that the applicant engaged in the
6
conduct alleged.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03472 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2007).  The case
before us does not present that infirmity.  That is, the Judge did not  find that Applicant engaged in
acts of security concern simply because he found Applicant’s various explanatory statements to be
unbelievable.  To the contrary, he based his findings on evidence such as Applicant’s admissions
made in connection with polygraph testing.  He concluded that these statements bore indicia of
reliability.  He also concluded Applicant’s later efforts to minimize his conduct or his claims not to
recall having made the inculpatory statements were unworthy of belief.  These conclusions were
consistent with the record that was before the Judge and constitute a reasonable interpretation of that
record.  We resolve this assignment of error adversely to Applicant.   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both in regard to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The Judge’s
whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of the Directive, in that he considered
Applicant’s conduct in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08063 at 4 (App.
Bd. Jul. 19, 2013).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”  
7
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
