 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11050 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2013, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on April 8, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
she received it on May 1, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She declined to submit any 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on July 24, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.e. She admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, but denied that the 
amounts alleged were correct. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She is married and has two adult children and two 
stepchildren. She has worked for her current employer, a defense contractor, since 
January 2004. She has a bachelor’s degree. She has no military service, but has held a 
security clearance since 1986, apparently without incident.1  
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports from July 2011 and 
August 2012. The SOR sets out five debts amounting to about $88,300. Applicant’s 
finances became a concern when her health insurance provider required higher 
copayment amounts and several family members suffered illnesses or medical 
conditions that required treatment and incurred medical expenses (date not specified in 
the record). Additionally, one of her daughters is disabled and requires full-time care 
from Applicant.2  
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e are medical accounts in 
the amounts of $787, $583, and $906 respectively. Applicant disputes all these debts by 
claiming that they have been paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), or that the debt is not hers 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). She provided documentation disputing SOR ¶ 1.a on her credit report, but 
failed to provide any documentation disputing the other two debts. I find that SOR ¶ 1.a 
was resolved, but SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e were not resolved.3 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are credit card accounts in 
the amounts of $30,937 and $55,091 respectively. Applicant admits to the underlying 
debt for each account, but claims that each creditor has tacked on interest and penalties 
in an unreasonable manner. She claims that she contacted the creditors in an attempt 
to resolve these debts, but the creditors would only accept full payment and she could 
not meet that term. She then contacted an attorney who advised her to let the debts 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 5. 
 
3 Items 3, 5-7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
become a judgment and then attempt to settle with the judgment holder. She plans to 
follow that advice. These debts are unresolved.4 
 
 Applicant’s financial worksheet indicates that she has negative disposable 
income after paying all expenses and debt obligations at the end of each month. 
Sometime in 2011, she informally contacted a debt counseling service. No further 
information is available regarding this contact.5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
4 Item 3, 5. 
 
5 Item 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 With the exception of the disputed debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a, all of Applicant’s 
debts remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient evidence to show that the debts 
are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant 
provided evidence her family incurred medical expenses, which contributed to her 
financial problems. However, in order for mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) to fully apply, 
Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. 
Although she recently contacted creditors to settle the credit card debts and contacted 
an attorney, she provided insufficient evidence to show she acted on the remaining 
debts. On the contrary, she indicated she would follow the attorney’s advice and allow 
the debts to become judgments and then try to settle them. This demonstrates a lack of 
responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant presented evidence 
of some financial counseling; however, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or under control because the remaining debts 
remain unpaid. There is no evidence that she has made a good-faith effort to pay the 
remaining debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) only partially apply. Applicant documented 
her dispute concerning SOR ¶ 1.a consequently, AG ¶ 20(e) applies to that debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s family 
medical problems and how they contributed to her debt problems. However, she has not 
shown a track record of financial stability. The record lacks evidence that Applicant has 
made an overall good-faith effort to resolve her debts. Therefore, she failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
