 
1 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14712 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The six charged-off or collection 
accounts totaling approximately $14,000 have yet to be resolved. He relied on 
inappropriate advice when completing his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), mitigating the personal conduct security concern. However, his 
unpaid financial delinquencies pose a financial considerations security concern. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 25, 
2013, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On March 26, 2013, Applicant answered the 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
SOR and requested a hearing. On May 16, 2013, I was assigned the case. On May 31, 
2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
for the hearing convened on June 10, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 
through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, without objection. Applicant testified at 
the hearing and called no additional witnesses... The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. No additional material was received. On June 
20, 2013, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts and denied any 
falsification. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old fire lieutenant who has worked for a defense contractor 
since June 1990. (Ex. 1, Tr. 31) He has been divorced three times and has two children, 
an eight-year-old daughter and a 21-year-old son. (Ex. 1) He submitted a 2003 thank-
you letter from the President and two letters of character. (Ex. A, B, C) His supervisor 
and a coworker state Applicant has an excellent work record and a proven track record 
for reliability and dependability. (Ex. A, B) They believe he is honest and trustworthy.  
 
Applicant’s September 2011 credit bureau report (CBR) lists a repossession and 
four collection accounts: a $768 credit card debt (SOR 1.a),2 a $64 medical debt (SOR 
1.d), a $94 auto parts store debt (SOR 1.e), and an $83 telephone service account 
(SOR 1.f). (Ex. 4) Applicant asserts he never made a purchase from the auto parts 
store. (Tr. 26) The $64 medical bill was reported in September 2010, and the auto parts 
store debt was reported in June 2008. The other two collections accounts were reported 
in September 2011. A $186 collection debt (SOR 1.c) was a medical debt for care 
received by Applicant’s daughter. (Tr. 26) 
 
In September 2011, when Applicant completed his e-QIP he answered “no” to 
the financial question asking if any debts had been turned over to a collection agency. 
(Ex. 1) At the time he completed the form, he knew he owed an amount following the 
voluntary repossession of his truck. In completing the form, he was unaware of some 
other smaller debts that remained unpaid. He asserts he was directed to answer “no” by 
his supervisor, who had recently gone through the security process seeking a 
clearance, because any credit report he had and the one the investigator would later 
rely upon when questioning him would be different. (SOR Answer, Tr. 33, 51) He 
believed the investigator would ask him about his finances, and he could explain the 
truck repossession then. He said he was not trying to hide anything. When questioned 
by the investigator, he stated he knew about the repossessed truck, but did not know 
about the other five smaller debts. (Ex. 2)  
 
In January 1994, Applicant divorced and received custody of his son. All property 
and liabilities were divided equally. (Ex. 2) In September 1995, he remarried and 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s January 23, 2013 CBR indicates this debt was “current” from April 2011 through December 
2012. (Ex. 3)  
 
3 
 
 
 
divorced in March 1998. There were no children of the marriage and all property and 
liabilities were equally divided. In June 2005, he remarried and divorced in September 
2010. There were no children of the marriage and all property and liabilities were 
equally divided. (Ex. 2) He does pay child support for his daughter and is current on that 
support. 
 
In late 2004, the interest on Applicant’s mortgage increased from 6% to 17% 
causing his monthly payments on his home to increase from $650 to $1,100. Unable to 
make his payments, he voluntarily surrendered the home to the mortgage company. In 
June 2007, he purchased a $20,000 2007 pickup truck for his wife under a special zero-
down, zero-interest-rate promotion. (Ex. 4) Three weeks after the purchase, his wife did 
not like the truck’s seat because it hurt her back, so the truck was returned to the 
dealership. (Tr. 24) Because the vehicle had been purchased with the special zero-
down, zero-interest-rate promotion, the dealership would not allow it as a trade-in on 
any other vehicle. (Tr. 24) At that time, the car salesman said Applicant would probably 
owe approximately $4,000 if he voluntarily returned the truck. (Tr. 25) 
 
Following the repossession, the truck sold for $8,000, which left Applicant with a 
$12,000 debt. From 2007 through January 2010, Applicant made $50 monthly 
payments on the debt. (Ex. 2) After separating from his wife in 2010, he made no further 
payments on the debt. In November 2011, during a personal subject interview, 
Applicant stated he intended to contact the lender to set up a repayment plan. (Ex. 2) 
He has not made any recent payments on this debt.  
 
Applicant considered taking money from his 401(k) retirement plan to pay the 
debt, but cannot because he previously obtained a loan from his retirement plan to 
replace a failed home air conditioner. (Tr. 39) His retirement plan allows him to have 
only one loan at a time. 
 
When Applicant was asked about his finances during a personal subject 
interview, he stated he was making $55,000 a year and paying $10,000 annually in child 
support and paying $2,000 annually for his son’s tuition. His monthly mortgage was 
$1,250 and his monthly car payment $717. (Ex. 2) He purchased a $43,000 truck that is 
scheduled to be paid off in August or September 2013. (Tr. 25) In January 2013, when 
he answered financial interrogatories, he stated his monthly net income was 
approximately $2,800, his rent had decreased to $600, his net monthly expenses were 
$1,600, and his monthly debt payments, including his $717 car payment, were $755, 
which left a net remainder of $441. (Ex. 3) He indicated he had $53,000 in bonds. At the 
hearing, he claims his current annual income is just under $60,000. (Tr. 42)  
 
In November 2011, during Applicant’s personal subject interview, he stated he 
intended to contact each of his other creditors (SOR 1.a, $768; SOR 1.c, $186; SOR 
1.e, $94; SOR 1.f, $83) by December 2011 to determine the validity of the obligations 
and would then either pay the debts or dispute them. (Ex. 2) He also stated during the 
interview that he knew he had some bad credit, but did not know exactly what was listed 
on his credit report. He indicated he decided to follow his supervisor’s advice and not 
report the debts on his e-QIP, but to discuss them when brought up during his interview. 
(Ex. 2)  
 
4 
 
 
 
 
When he contacted the automobile finance company in 2011, they wanted full 
payment on the debt, which he was unable to pay. (Tr. 28) He has not contacted the 
creditors of the other debts. (Tr. 27) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the Government’s security interests is the paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant owes approximately 
$14,000 on six past-due obligations. Four of Applicant’s debts are under $200 each and 
remain unpaid. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced no evidence of 
circumstances beyond his control, and he has not acted responsibly in addressing his 
debts. He has received no credit or financial counseling, has not demonstrated that his 
financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to bring them under control. 
He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. In November 2011, when he 
was questioned about his delinquent accounts, he stated he would contract the 
creditors by December 2011 and either pay the debts or dispute them. He has done 
neither.  
 
In the year and a half since Applicant’s November 2011 personal subject 
interview, during which he was questioned about his delinquent debt, he has made no 
payments on the debts. The largest debt (SOR 1.b, $12,656) was incurred in 2007 on 
which he made $50 monthly payments until 2010. This large debt was incurred when 
his then wife did not like the new truck’s seat, claiming it hurt her back. The voluntary 
repossession of the truck resulted in a $12,000 obligation. This debt remains unpaid. 
His unpaid debts cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant divorced in 1994, 1998, and 2010. He indicated, following his most 
recent divorce, he was unable to continue making the $50 monthly payments on the 
truck repossession debt. He failed to demonstrate how his divorces prevented him from 
addressing the other five debts, which totaled approximately $1,200. Applicant has not 
acted responsibly in addressing these past-due obligations. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling and the debts are not being 
resolved. AG & 20(c) does not apply. In the 19 months since being questioned about his 
delinquent debts, he has not contacted his creditors, has made no payment on the 
debts, has not established a good-faith effort to repay the overdue creditors, or 
otherwise resolve debts. AG & 20(d) does not apply. 
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, he admitted owing the six delinquent debts. He said 
he did not do business with the one auto parts dealer (SOR 1.e). Merely failing to 
recognize a debt is not the same as disputing the debt and providing documented proof 
to substantiate any basis of the dispute or providing evidence of actions to resolve the 
debts. AG & 20(e) does not apply. 
 
7 
 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in regard to falsification of Applicant’s security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Some of the five additional debts may not have been in collection when he 
completed his e-QIP. The January 2013 CBR indicates the $768 credit card account 
was current as of September 2011, when Applicant completed his e-QIP. The $83 
telephone bill was listed as a collection the same month the e-QIP was completed. The 
repossession was in 2007, the $64 medical debt went to collection in September 2010 
and the $94 car parts store debt, which Applicant denies doing business with, went to 
collection in June 2008.  
 
When Applicant completed his September 2011 e-QIP, he should have listed all 
of his delinquent debts. He knew about the truck and was unsure of other debts. During 
his subject interview, he said he had no information about the five smaller debts. The 
small size of these other debts makes his response plausible.  
 
Applicant’s failure to list the repossession and other debts on his e-QIP does not 
prove he deliberately failed to disclose information about these debts. He denied any 
intentional falsification of these debts. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It 
is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully. Deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification is a security concern. But not every inaccurate statement is a falsification. It 
is unlikely he was aware of the three small collection debts due to their nature and size. 
Failing to list these debts was not a falsification.  
 
Applicant knew the truck had been repossessed in 2007 and knew he was 
making payments on the $12,000 debt until 2010. He should have disclosed the 
repossession, and that the debt remained delinquent. He failed to disclose this debt 
because his supervisor told him to answer “no” to the financial questions and explain his 
answer during his personal subject interview. His supervisor was not an “authorized 
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning 
the security clearance process.”  
 
8 
 
 
 
Even though Applicant’s supervisor was not an authorized person, Applicant’s 
omission was due to improper or inadequate advice. Applicant did not review the 
Directive as to the definition of an “authorized” individual before completing his e-QIP. 
He knew the truck had been repossessed, assumed it would appear on his credit report, 
that he would be asked about it when interviewed, and he followed his supervisor’s 
advice. I find this approach, though flawed, was reasonable. He lacked specific intent to 
deceive the Government about his delinquent debts.  
 
Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and listened to his testimony, I find his 
failure to list the truck repossession was not a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification. I find for him as to personal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant returned a new truck 
shortly after it was purchased because his then wife found the seat uncomfortable. He 
assumed this would result in a $4,000 debt based on what the salesman told him. 
However, the actual debt was $12,000. He has not made a payment on this debt since 
2010. He has made no payments on any of his six delinquent debts since being 
questioned about them in November 2011. Three of the debts are under $100 each and 
a fourth debt is under $200. His failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable 
amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
 
9 
 
 
 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid the delinquent accounts, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his delinquent 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct concerns; however, he has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
