 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-09333
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his omission of information from
his security clearance application. However, security concerns about his close and
continuing ties to Afghan citizens residing in the United States, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan remain unchanged. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 23, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the ensuing background investigation,
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.  1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 17 documents (Items 1 - 17) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case. Items 8 - 17 were submitted for the limited purpose of administrative notice
of facts about Afghanistan and Pakistan.
2
On September 11, 2012, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline B (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant timely responded to the2
SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On April 30, 2013, Department
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant3
received the FORM on June 3, 2013, but he did not respond to it. The record closed on
July 3, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on July 23, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s mother is an Afghan
citizen residing in Pakistan (SOR 1.a); that his five sisters, three of whom reside in
Pakistan, are Afghan citizens (SOR 1.b); that his three brothers, all of whom reside in
Pakistan, are Afghan citizens (SOR 1.c); that he has one uncle and two aunts who are
Afghan citizens and live in Pakistan (SOR 1.d); and that he has two other uncles and
one other aunt who are citizens of and reside in Afghanistan (SOR 1.e). Under
Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts
when he submitted his eQIP. Specifically, it was alleged that he deliberately answered
“no” when asked in Section 20A if he had ever provided financial support to any foreign
national when, in fact, he provides financial support to his mother in Pakistan. (FORM,
Item 1)
Applicant denied the allegations at SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 2.a, but admitted the other
allegations. (FORM, Item 2) As to his denial of SOR 2.a, Applicant claimed he did not
understand the question. His admissions are incorporated herein as facts. After
reviewing all of the available information, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1982. In 1986, he moved with his family to
neighboring Pakistan to escape the Soviet occupation and the violence associated with
the Mujahedin resistance and subsequent civil war. He lived in Pakistan until November
2002, when he came to the United States. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in October
2011. He has not attended school in the United States, but has been employed here in
a variety of low-paying retail and food service jobs. After a brief period of unemployment
in late 2011, Applicant was hired in January 2012 as a translator by his current
employer, who is sponsoring his request for clearance. (FORM, Item 3)
Appellant initially applied in June 2010 for work as a translator with the company
where he now works. He was not hired at that time for medical reasons. In September
2010, he reapplied and submitted an Application for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P).
(FORM, Item 5) He also underwent a pre-employment interview in which a
Counterintelligence (CI) Screening Questionnaire (CSQ) (FORM, Item 6) was
completed. In that interview, he said he had heard about the job on television. He
3
wanted the job to earn more money and to help his mother financially. He again was not
hired, this time because of unresolved CI issues. He also disclosed that he sends about
$200 to his mother, a citizen of Afghanistan living in Pakistan. She is a widow who has
never worked outside the home and who is largely unable to support herself. Applicant
talks to her by telephone every week. (FORM, Item 7) 
When Applicant was hired for his current position in January 2012, he submitted
another eQIP (FORM, Item 3) and completed another CI interview and CSQ (FORM,
Item 4). During his February 2012 CI interview, he again stated that he heard about the
job on television, but he did not mention his desire to help his mother financially.
However, on the issue of providing foreign financial assistance, the interview only asked
about such assistance to foreign persons or entities engaged in activities harmful to the
United States. By contrast, one of the questions in eQIP Section 20A (Foreign Activities)
asked “Have you EVER provided financial support for any foreign national?” Applicant
answered ‘no.” In response to SOR 2.a, Applicant acknowledged that he still sends
money to his mother, but that he thought the eQIP question referred only to foreign
organizations or entities other than his family. He denied intentionally falsifying his
eQIP. (FORM, Item 2)
Despite Applicant’s denials, the record supports the SOR allegations regarding
his family ties to Afghanistan and Pakistan. In February 2012, he was interviewed by a
Government investigator as part of his background investigation. A review of his
relatives and other personal information showed that most of Applicant’s family are
citizens of Afghanistan and reside either there or in Pakistan. He also has three sisters
who live in the United States. They are housewives who still hold Afghan citizenship and
are registered aliens. Only one of his sisters’ husbands is a U.S. citizen. Applicant
speaks with his sisters by telephone about once a week. Applicant’s brothers and
uncles work as tailors, barbers, and drivers, or are in school. His sisters and aunts are
housewives. None of his family has any current or former ties to any foreign
government. This same information was reviewed in his CSQs. (FORM, Items 3, 4, 6,
and 7)
Applicant first entered the United States on a fiancé visa. He married a
naturalized citizen, also from Afghanistan, in January 2003. The marriage ended by
divorce in February 2010. Applicant has three children born in the United States by a
woman with whom he has cohabited since 2007. They range in age from two to six
years. (FORM, Items 3 and 7)
Regarding Afghanistan and Pakistan, I take administrative notice of the following
facts contained in FORM Items 8 - 17:
Most of Pakistan’s western border abuts Afghanistan. To the southwest, Pakistan
shares a border with Iran. Extensive terror networks operate along the border with
Afghanistan in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the central
Afghanistan border, in the Khyber Pass region in northwest Pakistan, and in Balochistan
Province in southwest Pakistan. Chief among these terror networks are the Taliban, the
Haqqani Network, and al-Qaeda. They operate in many cases without meaningful
interference from the Pakistani government, and their activities consist of anti-U.S. and
 In addition to the contained in the FORM, I obtained information sua sponte from the CIA W orld Factbook4
page regarding Pakistan at www.cia.gov. 
4
anti-coalition military operations across the border into Afghanistan. The FATA, and
other areas mentioned above, provide safe havens from which terrorists have been able
to plan and launch attacks on U.S. and coalition troops and interests in Afghanistan.
Bombings and other acts of terror also have been reported throughout Pakistan, but the
main focus of terrorist activity in Pakistan consists of attacks in urban areas, such as the
capital city of Islamabad. Because of this information, the U.S. Department of State has
issued numerous travel advisories and warnings to U.S. citizens considering traveling to
Pakistan.
The United States and Pakistan have had diplomatic relations since Pakistan
obtained its independence from Great Britain in 1947. The countries’ interests have
been in general agreement for much of that time. Since 2001, Pakistan has helped the
U.S. in its global war on terrorism and has helped capture hundreds of Taliban and Al-
Qaeda personnel. However, as noted, efforts to deny areas adjacent to Afghanistan as
safe havens for terrorist organization have not been as effective as the U.S. would like.
Another issue related to terrorist activity in Pakistan is the fact that Pakistani
government and military entities have committed numerous human rights violations in
the name of counter-terror operations and investigations. Extra-judicial killings, arbitrary
arrests without access to due process, and other human rights problems are
commonplace.
Further, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is a federal republic made up of an
executive, a legislative, and a judicial branch, whose powers and limitations are
contained in a national constitution. The legislature is comprised of representatives in a
bicameral parliament chosen through open elections from a multi-party system. A
president and prime minister, and appointed cabinet members make up the head of the
executive branch. Supreme court justices are appointed by the executive to oversee a
common law legal system influenced by Islamic Sharia law.4
Afghanistan is an independent nation first ruled by indigenous monarchs
beginning in 1919, when the British Empire relinquished control. However, in 1979, the
Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and occupied the country until 1989, when the
Mujahedin resistance drove them out. Thereafter, a civil war took place which ended
when the Taliban established a regime based on an extreme fundamentalist version of
Islamic law. Human rights were virtually non-existent, especially for women, and dissent
was countered through violent repression. The Taliban regime also created
circumstances that allowed Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida safe haven and resources
for international terrorist actions that culminated in the attacks on the U.S. on
September 11, 2001. 
The subsequent U.S. military actions against the Taliban allowed the
establishment of an openly-elected government based on a western democratic model.
However, the country remains unstable. Human rights abuses continue at the hands of
the Taliban in areas they still control. The Afghan government continues to struggle in
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
5
its efforts to overcome a legacy of corruption, and U.S.-led coalition forces have been
unable to provide a secure environment either in the countryside or in Afghanistan’s
urban centers. U.S. personnel and anyone aligned with U.S. interests are at constant
risk of attack, kidnapping, and other hostile acts by insurgents.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls7
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
6
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such9
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Personal Conduct
Applicant omitted from his most recent eQIP the fact that he sends money to his
mother periodically. The SF 85P he submitted in 2010 did not ask about foreign ties or
financial assistance. Deliberate falsifications in response to reasonable investigative
inquiries raise concerns about an individual’s judgment and trustworthiness. Those
concerns are articulated at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, if shown to be deliberate, Applicant’s omission would be
disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(a):
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant admitted omitting from his 2012 eQIP the fact he sends his mother
money. However, he denied doing so in an attempt to hide that fact from the
Government. He explained that he thought he was being asked about foreign financial
assistance to entities other than his family. This is consistent with the inquiries of both
CSQs and CI interviews, which addressed financial aid to entities, family or otherwise,
engaged in conduct or activities harmful to U.S. interests. A review of all information
probative of his intent in filling out his eQIP shows that he was generally forthcoming
about all of his foreign contacts and other material information in his background. I
conclude Applicant did not try to conceal his financial assistance to his mother.
7
Foreign Influence
The Government’s information established that Applicant has close family ties to
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Available information also shows that both countries present
a heightened risk that Applicant could be pressured or coerced through his ties there.
The security concern raised by these facts is expressed at AG ¶ 6 as follows:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism. 
Applicant is close to his mother. He provides modest financial support when he
can, and he contacts her often. He also is close to his siblings in the United States and
abroad, with whom he has weekly contact. He applied for his translator job so he could
continue to help his mother. Other than his girlfriend and their three children, all of his
family ties, including his sisters in the U.S., are citizens of Afghanistan, a country which
presents a heightened risk of exploitation. Further, some of his foreign contacts still
reside in Afghanistan. Others reside in Pakistan, also a country that presents a
heightened risk of exploitation. This information requires application of the following AG
¶ 7 disqualifying conditions:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
Generally speaking, Applicant’s assistance to his mother, and his continuing
contact with his siblings, are admirable and reasonable. However, in the more limited
context of adjudicating suitability for access to classified information, they present
reasonable security concerns. These facts have placed on Applicant the burden of
showing he will protect U.S. national interests and that he will not be unduely conflicted
by his family ties to Afghanistan and Pakistan. To do so, he must present information to
establish one or more of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating conditions:
8
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or
are approved by the cognizant security authority; and
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons,
groups, or organizations from a foreign country.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(d) is not pertinent to these facts and
circumstances. Applicant is entitled to some benefit under AG ¶ 8(e) because he
disclosed his foreign ties in two CSQs and his second eQIP. However, AG ¶ 8(e)
focuses more on persons who already have been working in foreign countries or with
foreign citizens. That is not the case here. Applicant has no record of work as a
translator in support of U.S. efforts in Afghanistan or elsewhere.
As to the remaining mitigating conditions, I conclude none apply. The heightened
risk of associations in or with these two countries cannot be disputed. As to Applicant’s
sense of loyalty or obligation, he did not address this issue in response to the SOR or
FORM. His statements on this point during both CI interviews and in his background
investigation subject interview were ambiguous at best. Finally, Applicant is in regular
and ongoing contact with his mother and siblings. These ties are presumed to be close,
and Applicant presented nothing to rebut that presumption. On balance, he has not met
his burden of persuasion here, and the security concerns raised by the Government’s
information remain.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors. I have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 31-year-old naturalized citizen
originally from Afghanistan. He has lived in the United States for almost 11 years and he
has been a U.S. citizen for almost two years. He has three U.S.-born children and has
9
worked hard at various jobs since arriving in the U.S. He is close to his mother and
siblings and demonstrates responsibility in trying to help his mother financially. He also
appears to have been candid about his foreign ties. However, he did not present
sufficient information to establish that his circumstances would preclude a conflict of
interest between his obligation to protect U.S. interests rather than those of foreign
citizens to whom he is close. He provided nothing in response to the FORM, leaving
unchanged the doubts about his suitability for a clearance. The Government’s
compelling interest in protecting its sensitive information requires those doubts be
resolved against granting access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
