 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-00907 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct. He was previously convicted of filing a false police report and recently filed a 
security clearance application, where he deliberately omitted his history of illegal drug 
use. Although he has honorably served as a defense contractor for over two years, 
doubts about his eligibility persist because he refuses to take full responsibility for his 
conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On October 10, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On November 
23, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 On December 21, 2012, Department Counsel indicated it was ready to proceed 
with a hearing in this matter. Scheduling of the hearing was delayed because Applicant 
was working overseas and due to the lack of a suitable video teleconference connection 
 
2 
 
 
at his overseas location. Furthermore, budgetary constraints prevented travel to conduct 
hearings. On July 2, 2013, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling Applicant’s 
hearing for July 29, 2013, which coincided with his return to the United States.  
 
 The hearing was held as scheduled. Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 4 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and requested additional time to submit documents. I granted his 
request and he timely submitted Ax. C – Ax. E, which were admitted without objection. 
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on August 6, 2013, and the record closed on 
August 15, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 28, is single and has no children. He emigrated from Afghanistan as a 
young child and is a U.S. citizen. He is a linguist for a U.S. defense contractor. He has 
principally worked overseas in support of the U.S. military for the past two years. (Tr. at 
26-27, 58, 102-103; Gx. 1 – 2, Gx. 4) 
  
 Applicant used marijuana prior to his employment as a defense contractor in 
August 2011. He started using marijuana when he was in high school and last used in 
November or December 2010. (Tr. at 30-37, 68-69, 97-99; Gx. 3) 
 
In 2004, Applicant was stopped by police for driving a vehicle with an invalid 
temporary license plate. He had recently purchased a used car and was unaware that 
the license plate was invalid. He was charged with possession of a forged license plate. 
Applicant was unaware that the temporary license plate was a forgery, but pled guilty on 
the advice of counsel because the criminal charge would be reduced to a violation. His 
explanation was both plausible and credible. (Tr. at 46-48, 96-97; Gx. 4) 
 
In 2005, Applicant was working as a delivery driver. He had recently graduated 
from high school and, instead of going to college, decided to get a job to support his 
mother and the rest of his family. One day, after making a number of deliveries, 
Applicant stopped to get gas and inadvertently left the door to his delivery truck open. 
When he returned, approximately $5,000 in cash – the money he had collected that day 
on his delivery route – was missing. Applicant decided to concoct a story that the 
delivery truck was broken into to cover up his own negligence. He decided to break the 
truck’s window and took other steps to make it appear as if the truck had been broken 
into. He then filed a false police report. The police investigated and became suspicious, 
when the evidence at the purported crime scene was inconsistent with Applicant’s 
version of events. After being questioned by the police, Applicant confessed that he filed 
a false report. He was fired from his job and was charged with making a false police 
report. Applicant pled guilty to the charge, and was sentenced to community service and 
probation. (Tr. at 43-46, 88-92; Gx. 3) 
 
Applicant testified that he has matured immensely since the 2005 arrest and 
conviction. After the incident, he went to college and graduated in 2009. He is currently 
 
3 
 
 
several credits shy of attaining a master’s degree. Applicant’s academic achievements, 
however, did not immediately lead to improved job prospects. He was only able to 
secure low-paying jobs and suffered a period of unemployment, which led him to 
become delinquent on a number of debts. His prospects changed dramatically when he 
was recruited for his current job in 2011. (Tr. at 26-27, 92-94; Ax. E) 
 
In August 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 
connection with his prospective job with his current employer. Applicant disclosed his 
prior criminal history and recent financial problems on his SCA. However, he did not 
disclose his past marijuana use because he was concerned that he would not get the 
job and the disclosure might affect his future employment opportunities in the 
intelligence arena. Applicant claims that he thought the SCA was only going to his new 
employer, not the Government. He testified that, shortly after submitting the SCA, his 
employer’s Facility Security Officer (FSO) informed him that the SCA was going to be 
submitted to the Government as part of the process to determine if he would be granted 
a security clearance. Applicant claims that he immediately informed his FSO that he had 
omitted his past drug use on the SCA. The FSO purportedly advised him that it was too 
late to correct the SCA and he should inform the investigator of the adverse information 
during his subsequent background interview. Applicant did not submit any evidence to 
corroborate his testimony. (Tr. at 28-30, 69-77, 94-96; Gx. 2 – 3) 
 
Seven days later, Applicant was interviewed by an agent from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant testified that he told the OPM agent about 
omitting his past drug use from his SCA. The OPM agent’s summary of the interview is 
silent regarding any discussion of past drug use or Applicant’s purported admission that 
he omitted such drug use on the SCA. (Tr. at 40-43, 70-72, 77-78; Gx. 4) However, the 
summary is replete with other information discussed at the interview, to include 
Applicant’s background, his criminal record, and other matters of potential security 
concern. The summary contains Applicant’s statement to the OPM agent that he 
inadvertently failed to list being fired from the delivery driver job on the SCA. (Gx. 4 at 4) 
At hearing, Applicant admitted that he intentionally omitted being fired from the delivery 
driver job on the SCA because he feared the adverse information would prevent him 
from obtaining the job as a defense contractor.1 (Tr. at 107) 
 
The next day, Applicant underwent a counterintelligence (CI) background 
interview. He was specifically asked if he had used illegal drugs in the past. He revealed 
his past drug use and his deliberate falsification of the SCA. Applicant corrected his 
SCA to reflect his past drug use and that he was fired from his job as a delivery driver. 
He was subsequently hired by the defense contractor, granted a security clearance, and 
has worked overseas in support of the U.S. military for the past two years. (Tr. at 29, 
37-40, 84, 103-107; Gx. 1; Gx. 3) 
 
Applicant testified that his initial year-long deployment to Afghanistan was not 
overly dangerous – at least in comparison to his recent deployment. Applicant’s living 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s deliberate omission of this adverse employment history was not alleged in the SOR, 
and is only being considered in assessing his credibility and mitigation case. 
 
4 
 
 
conditions during his initial deployment were austere and he placed his life on the line 
on a number of occasions to support the U.S. military mission. He also suffered a 
serious injury, but kept working for months due to the lack of skilled linguists in 
Afghanistan. When Applicant returned to the United States from this initial deployment, 
he was twice cited for driving on a suspended driver’s license. (Tr. at 48-52, 59-64) 
 
Applicant’s subsequent deployment to Afghanistan has been far more 
dangerous. He has been subjected to constant enemy fire. U.S. military service 
members praise his dedication and work in support of the U.S. mission, and his courage 
in the face of danger. (Tr. at 56-57, 64-67; Ax. A – B; Ax. D) 
 
Applicant was placed in charge of other linguists, and was granted access to 
highly sensitive and classified U.S. information. He was hand selected as the “primary 
linguist” on countless important missions in support of U.S. military efforts in 
Afghanistan. He has been exposed to illegal drug use and has not been tempted to 
engage in such illicit conduct. (Tr. at 53-55, 97-98; Ax. A – B)  
 
Applicant is extremely security conscious. He generally refuses to discuss his 
work with others for concern he may inadvertently reveal sensitive U.S. information. At 
hearing, Applicant was hesitant to reveal even general information about his work that 
would be favorable to him. No sensitive or classified information was revealed. 
Applicant wishes to continue to serve the United States in support of the U.S. mission in 
Afghanistan. (Tr. at 67-68, 93-94, 101-102; Ax. D – E) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to “control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Executive Oder 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), 
as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions that are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge must apply the guidelines 
in a  common sense manner and take into account the whole person in reaching a 
fair and impartial decision. An administrative judge should consider all available and 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication an 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of 
Defense have established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s submission of a false police report in 2005 and deliberate falsification 
of his SCA constitutes a pattern of deceitful conduct, and directly implicate the Guideline 
E security concerns.2 This record also establishes the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
                                                          
2 The SOR also alleges Applicant’s past marijuana use (¶1.c), 2004 conviction for possession of a 
forged license plate (¶1.d), and citation in 2011 for driving on a suspended driver’s license (¶1.e). 
 
6 
 
 
(a) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
safeguard protected information. 
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 were potentially raised by the 
evidence, specifically: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the fact; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or 
significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically 
concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated 
fully and truthfully;  
 
(c)  the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant’s submission of a false police report in 2005 and decision in 2011 to 
falsify his SCA raises serious security concerns about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. In both instances, Applicant decided to lie versus accept the potential 
consequences of his personal conduct. However, two years have passed since 
Applicant submitted his SCA and he corrected the omission just a week after submitting 
the SCA. No evidence was presented that the Government was aware of his past drug 
use prior to Applicant’s voluntary disclosure of this adverse information to the CI 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant admitted these allegations, but mitigated the security concerns arising from these allegations. 
Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.e are decided for Applicant and will not be further discussed.  
 
7 
 
 
investigator.3 Moreover, over the past two years, Applicant has proven his reliability time 
and again while in combat in support of the U.S. military mission in Afghanistan. 
Additionally, he has not engaged in the conduct that led him to falsify his SCA, namely, 
illegal drug use – even though he has been exposed to such while working in 
Afghanistan. Yet, Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden to mitigate the security 
concerns at issue because during the course of his background investigation and at 
hearing he attempted to minimize his intentional falsification of the SCA. 
 
 Applicant claims that his FSO contributed to the falsification of his SCA by not 
allowing him to correct it, and advising him to simply inform the investigator of the 
adverse information during his background interview. Applicant submitted no evidence 
to corroborate his testimony and I found this portion of his testimony not credible.4 
 
Furthermore, when first given an opportunity to reveal his past drug use and 
deliberate falsification of his SCA, Applicant did not reveal the adverse information. At 
hearing, Applicant testified he informed the OPM agent that he omitted his past drug 
use from his SCA. However, the summary of interview, Gx. 4, is silent on this point. 
Although it is theoretically possible that the OPM agent simply forgot to include this 
adverse information, it is not reasonable or plausible, especially in light of the detailed 
information about Applicant’s background and other matters of a potential security 
concern contained in the summary. In addition, Applicant apparently provided false 
information to the OPM agent during his background interview, when he claimed that he 
inadvertently omitted being fired from the delivery driver job on his SCA.  
 
After considering Applicant’s minimization and less-than-candid responses during 
the course of the underlying security investigation, I am left with concerns as to whether 
he would be fully candid if faced with a security-related matter requiring full disclosure, 
especially if such disclosure might impact his livelihood. Under such circumstances, 
none of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 fully apply and the favorable evidence 
noted above does not mitigate the security concerns at issue. 
 
                                                          
3 The CI investigator’s question to Applicant, whether he had used illegal drugs in the past without 
more, does not amount to “being confronted with the facts” prior to Applicant’s voluntary disclosure. 
 
4 I further found Applicant’s testimony that he was unaware that the SCA was being submitted to 
the U.S. Government for consideration of a security clearance unpersuasive. The SCA states in clear 
language that the purpose of the form is for the consideration of the individual submitting the form for a 
security clearance. See, e.g., Gx. 2 at 2 (“Purpose of this Form . . . U.S. Government conducts 
background investigations . . . for positions requiring access to classified information . . . Withholding, 
misrepresenting, or falsifying information will have an impact on a security clearance . . . up to an 
including denial or revocation of your security clearance . . .”) (emphasis in original). Applicant’s testimony 
that he thought the SCA was only going to his employer as part of his employment application is simply 
not credible in light of the clear language of the SCA, and Applicant’s age and educational background. 
Moreover, even if Applicant actually thought he was only lying to his employer, such does not mitigate the 
security concerns at issue. See AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer . . . .)  
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).5 I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a 
defense contractor in Afghanistan, to include the letters from U.S. military members who 
have served with him. This record evidence demonstrates that over the past two years 
Applicant has risked his life in support of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan and he has 
been repeatedly entrusted with highly sensitive and classified information without issue. 
However, doubts regarding Applicant’s suitability persist because he refuses to take full 
responsibility for his misconduct and continues to minimize his deliberate falsification of 
his SCA. Consequently, in light of the clearly consistent standard and the requirement 
that all doubts raised by the evidence be resolved in favor of national security, eligibility 
for a security clearance is hereby denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.e:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
