 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-02141 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct concerns, 
but failed to mitigate the foreign influence concerns arising from his family members 
residing in Afghanistan. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging the security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On 
December 27, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 On February 4, 2013, Department Counsel indicated it was ready to proceed with 
a hearing in this matter. Scheduling of the hearing was delayed because Applicant was 
working overseas and due to the lack of suitable video teleconference capability. 
Furthermore, budgetary constraints temporarily prevented travel to conduct hearings. 
On July 2, 2013, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling Applicant’s hearing for July 
30, 2013, which coincided with his return to the United States.  
 
2 
 
 
The hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 
through 8. Gx. 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence without objection. I overruled 
Applicant’s objections to Gx. 7 and 8 (credit reports), and admitted said exhibits. 
Department Counsel also offered a proposed summary of administrative facts regarding 
Afghanistan taken from official, unclassified U.S. Government documents. The 
Government’s proposed summary was marked Gx. 9 for identification, but was not 
admitted into evidence. The source documents were marked as exhibits (Exh.) I – IX 
and, without objection, were considered for administrative notice. The relevant facts for 
administrative notice regarding Afghanistan are set forth below. 
 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (Ax.) A through F, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant requested additional time post-hearing to 
submit documents. I granted his request and he timely submitted Ax. G through J, which 
were also admitted without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on 
August 7, 2013, and the record closed on August 23, 2013.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is in his late forties or early fifties. He was born in Afghanistan and 
immigrated to the United States in 1987. He earned a civil engineering degree in 
Afghanistan prior to immigrating to the United States. He was naturalized as a U.S. 
citizen in 2001. (Tr. at 39, 56; Gx. 1, Gx. 3; Ax. A – B) 
 
In 2011, Applicant heard of an opportunity to work as a linguist for a U.S. defense 
contractor in Afghanistan. He applied for the position because he wanted to work in “his 
country.” (Gx. 5 at 8) After going through a counter-intelligence background check, he 
was hired by the defense contractor and has worked as a linguist for the U.S. 
Government in Afghanistan for the past two years. Several individuals who have worked 
with Applicant in Afghanistan provided reference letters extolling his reliability and 
excellent work on behalf of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. (Tr. at 59-63; Ax. A – B) 
 
Applicant’s mother, wife, and children are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Applicant lived with his family and worked in Afghanistan for about two and a half years 
prior to starting his current job. He speaks with them frequently and is their sole source 
of financial support. In order to protect his family, Applicant has not told them that he is 
working for the U.S. Government and recently moved his family to a safer location 
within Afghanistan. Additionally, he testified that in the entire time he has worked for his 
current employer in Afghanistan he has not visited his family. He has hired an attorney 
to facilitate his family’s future move to the United States. (Tr. at 42-46, 53-54, 58-59; Gx. 
1, Gx. 3 – 4; Ax. H, Ax. J) 
 
                                                          
1 Also at hearing, the SOR was amended without objection to correct minor typographical matters 
and to include the ISCR case number. (Tr. at 15-17) 
 
2 I have generalized the facts to further protect Applicant’s privacy.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has two brothers and one sister who are foreign citizens. One of 
Applicant’s brothers and his sister are resident-citizens of Afghanistan. His contact with 
them is quite limited and he does not provide them financial support. His brother and his 
sister’s husband own their own business in Afghanistan. Applicant’s other brother is a 
resident-citizen of a European Union (EU) country. Applicant’s contact with this brother 
is also quite limited. None of Applicant’s siblings are connected to the Afghan 
government or other foreign entity. (Tr. at 46-51; Gx. 4) 
 
Applicant’s wife has several brothers and sisters who are resident-citizens of 
Afghanistan. They or their spouses own their own businesses in Afghanistan, and have 
no connection to the Afghan government or other foreign entity. One of his wife’s sisters 
and his brother-in-law are U.S. citizens, and Applicant is quite close to them. (Tr. at 51-
54)3 
 
When Applicant applied for his current position in 2011 he was made aware of a 
number of delinquent debts totaling less than $10,000 that appeared on his credit 
report. Applicant was not aware of these debts when he submitted his security 
clearance application (SCA). He disputes the validity of these debts because he paid all 
his bills prior to moving to Afghanistan in 2009. He recently hired a U.S.-based debt 
resolution company to resolve the debts appearing on his credit report and listed on the 
SOR. He has been successful in disputing several of these debts and the Government 
concedes a number of the entries are duplicates. As for those debts that are eventually 
determined to be his, Applicant has the financial means and is willing to pay them. He 
submitted documentary proof of payment of one of the disputed debts with his post-
hearing submission. (Tr. at 63-71; Gx. 3 – 5, Gx. 7; Ax. C – I) 
 
 Following the September 11 attacks, U.S. and coalition forces liberated 
Afghanistan from the terror imposed by the Taliban and its terrorist allies. (Exh I at 5) 
“Afghanistan has made significant progress since the Taliban were deposed in 2001, 
but still faces daunting challenges, including fighting an insurgency, preventing the 
return or resurgence of al-Qaida, recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and 
rebuilding a shattered physical, economic, and political infrastructure.” (Exh II at 1) The 
U.S. State Department warns that “the security threat to all U.S. citizens in Afghanistan 
remains critical.” (Exh VI at 1) The State Department further warns that: 
 
No part of Afghanistan is immune from violence, and the potential exists 
throughout the country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, against 
U.S. and other Western nationals at any time. Remnants of the former 
Taliban regime and the al-Qaida terrorist network, as well as other groups 
hostile to International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) military 
operations, remain active. Afghan authorities have limited ability to 
maintain order and ensure the security of Afghan citizens and foreign 
visitors. (Id.) 
                                                          
3 Applicant’s wife’s siblings were not alleged as a concern in the SOR, and these familial 
connections are only being considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” 
AG ¶ 2(b). Furthermore, “[s]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on 
the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Moreover, the Appeal Board has stated that “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 
1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
An individual’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. However, there is no per se rule against applicants who have such ties. 
Instead, in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
coercion, an administrative judge must consider the foreign government involved; the 
intelligence gathering history of that government; the country’s human rights record; and 
the presence of terrorist activity in that country.5 
 
 Applicant’s immediate family members (mother, wife, and children) in 
Afghanistan, coupled with the uncertain security environment in Afghanistan, raise the 
foreign influence concern.6 These foreign connections also establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-06619 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 2013).  
 
6 Applicant mitigated the security concern raised by his connections to his siblings because their 
familial bonds are not close and, as to his brother from an EU country, such familial connection does not 
raise a foreign influence concern. Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 1.i – 1.k are decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s foreign connection to Afghanistan does not end the foreign influence 
analysis. AG ¶ 8 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the security 
concern and the following were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States over 25 years ago and has been 
working as a defense contractor in Afghanistan for the past two years. He has taken a 
number of steps to minimize the risk to his family. However, his family’s presence in 
Afghanistan raises a significant security concern because of the realistic danger that 
they can be used by hostile forces within Afghanistan to influence or manipulate him. 
Notwithstanding his deep and longstanding relationships to the United States and his 
attempts to shield his family from the danger posed by his work for the U.S. 
Government in Afghanistan, the foreign influence concern is not mitigated. Applicant’s 
family remains particularly vulnerable to the threat posed by the Taliban and other 
extremist elements operating within Afghanistan.7 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) do not apply. At 
the same time, this finding is not a comment on Applicant’s patriotism and loyalty but 
merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with 
choices that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.8 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 09-08099 (App. Bd. Sep. 14, 2012) (Despite his deep and longstanding 
relationships in the United States, applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concern arising from 
his family in Afghanistan). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09329 (App. Bd. Mar. 18, 2013) (same). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
 
7 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s past credit report, Gx. 7, implicates the Guideline F concern and 
specifically the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19 (a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns implicated by the delinquent debts 
appearing on his past credit report. Although he did not quickly address his debts once 
he was made aware of them, the delay was understandable as it was due to his service 
overseas as a defense contractor. He has now engaged the services of a debt 
resolution company and has resolved a number of the debts at issue. As for those debts 
that remain, Applicant has the financial means to pay them and, more importantly, a 
demonstrated track record of debt resolution. Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.n are 
decided for Applicant because the record evidence establishes the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant’s omission of the delinquent debts on his SCA implicates the above 
concern and notably the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
8 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout the security 
clearance process. An applicant should disclose any potential derogatory information. 
However, the omission of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to 
establish that an applicant intentionally falsified. An omission is not deliberate if the 
person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or 
misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.9  
 
 Applicant did not deliberately fail to disclose his delinquent debts because he 
was not aware of the debts when he submitted his SCA. He had moved overseas in 
2009 and when he returned to the United States was unaware that several creditors had 
reported bad debts in his name to the credit bureaus. He subsequently hired a debt 
resolution company that successfully challenged several of the debts. Furthermore, 
several of the debts appearing on his credit report are duplicates. Therefore, SOR ¶ 3.a 
is decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a 
defense contractor in support of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. However, after 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the risk that 
adverse foreign influence could be brought to bear upon him through his family in 
Afghanistan. AG ¶ 2(a)(8).  
 
                                                          
9 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
10 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:         Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.k:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.n:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  3.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
