 Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-00287
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his abuse of alcohol and his
alcohol-related misconduct. His request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 29, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. This is his first application for a security clearance. After reviewing
the results of the ensuing background investigation, which included his responses to
interrogatories from Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators,  it could not be1
determined that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines (AG) were implemented on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were published3
in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Although information in support of SOR 1.g has been considered as part of the record as a whole, this4
allegation does not present facts which raise a security concern. Accordingly, I find for Applicant as to SOR
1.g.
2
access to classified information.  On February 26, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in
the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  regarding alcohol consumption (Guideline G).3
Applicant timely answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on June 21, 2013, and I convened a hearing in this matter on July
15, 2013. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented
Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s
Answer included ten attachments that were admitted without objection as Applicant’s
Exhibits (Ax.) A - J. At hearing, he proffered two more exhibits, which were admitted
without objection as Ax. K and L. Applicant also testified. DOHA received a transcript
(Tr.) of the hearing on July 30, 2013.
Pleadings
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that from about June 1989 until at
least September 2012, Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point
of intoxication (SOR 1.a); that in June 1989, he was charged with and pleaded guilty to
public drunkenness (SOR 1.b); that in July 1992, he was charged with public
drunkenness and possession of a false identification, for which he was fined and his
driver’s license was suspended for 90 days (SOR 1.c); that in March 2002, he was
arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI), a charge that was reduced
three years later, when he was fined and ordered to attend six weeks of alcohol
treatment (SOR 1.d); that in April 2010, he was arrested and charged with DUI, 2nd
offense, a charge that was nolle prosequi despite his admission that he had consumed
three or four beers before he was arrested (SOR 1.e); that from February to April 2011,
he received treatment for a diagnosis of alcohol dependence (SOR 1.f); and that
Applicant intends to consume alcohol, approximately twice monthly, despite being
diagnosed as alcohol dependent (SOR 1.h).
Applicant denied, with explanation, the allegations at SOR 1.a and 1.h. Some of
his explanations admit facts which support the allegations being denied. He admitted,
with explanation, the remaining allegations.  4
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed
the response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, and based on my assessment of
3
Applicant’s demeanor and credibility at the hearing, I make the following additional
findings of fact.
Applicant is 41 years old and is employed by a defense contractor for work in
cyberanalysis and business development. In 2010, he was hired for that work by
another contractor, and he has worked in the same capacity for his current employer
since July 2012. Before finding work as a defense contractor, Applicant owned or was
partners in several small businesses. In 1995, he and his father partnered in a business
running two convenience stores. In 2008, a dispute about the business started when
Applicant’s sister and father took over the business without his knowledge. A civil suit
filed by Applicant in January 2010 was settled in April 2012; however, Applicant
struggled personally with these events and is still estranged from his parents and his
sister as a result. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Tr. 32)
Applicant was married from October 1995 until March 2003, when he and his ex-
wife divorced after three years of separation. They had two children together, now ages
16 and 13, for whom Applicant pays monthly support and has shared custody. (Gx. 4)
After submitting his eQIP in 2010, Applicant was given an interim clearance that
was subsequently revoked pending resolution of the issues presented in this case.
There is no indication he mishandled classified information or otherwise did not meet his
obligations while holding the interim clearance. (Gx. 1; Tr. 25 - 26, 32)
In his eQIP, Applicant disclosed the alcohol-related arrests alleged in the SOR.
Subject interviews and records produced during his background investigation and in
response to DOD interrogatories (Gx. 2 - 6) showed the following:
SOR 1.b: Applicant began drinking in high school, and was first arrested at age
17 for public intoxication. He had been drinking beer and whiskey with some
friends. When he passed out on a neighbor’s lawn, the police were called and he
was taken to jail for the night. He pleaded guilty and paid a $100 fine. 
SOR 1.c: In 1992, at age 20 and still underage for drinking, he and some friends
went to the beach, where they used altered driver’s licenses to go to bars. After
drinking between eight and ten beers at one bar, Applicant was stopped by a
police officer while walking to another bar. Applicant was arrested and charged
with public intoxication and possession of false identification. His friends posted a
$200 bond to get him out of jail. Applicant pleaded guilty, forfeited the $200, and
his driver’s license was suspended for 90 days. 
SOR 1.d: In March 2002, while his divorce was pending, Applicant went out with
friends and drank about eight beers and three or four shots of vodka. While
driving home, he lost control of his vehicle and ran off the road. He was taken to
the hospital for minor medical treatment. A blood test showed he was intoxicated
and Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI). The case was
continued for three years and Applicant eventually pleaded guilty to a reduced
charge of driving with an unlawful alcohol concentration (DUAC). In February
2005, he completed a court-ordered six-week alcohol and drug safety action
4
program (ADSAP). He was also ordered to obtain a state-mandated auto
insurance rider required for anyone convicted of an alcohol-related driving
offense.
SOR 1.e: In April 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, 2nd
Offense. He had met some friends at a bar. As he drove home, a police officer
saw him swerve in traffic and pulled him over. Applicant admitted having a few
beers and was given several field sobriety tests. He was then taken to jail where
he refused a breathalyser test. On February 7, 2011, Applicant enrolled in
ADSAP while his DUI case was still pending. He completed that course on April
28, 2011 (Ax. B); however, he also was provisionally evaluated by ADSAP as
being physiologically dependent on alcohol, and it was recommended that he
“needs work towards total abstinence.”
Applicant last consumed more than three or four beers the night of his second
DUI arrest. From then until October 2012, he consumed alcohol moderately, drinking no
more than one or two beers or glasses of wine each month. Some months he would not
drink at all. Applicant avers he has not consumed any alcohol since October 6, 2012,
and he submitted a notarized statement of his intent to abstain from future alcohol use.
Applicant now attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) about three times a month. (Answer;
Gx. 5; Tr. 30 - 31, 32, 39, 42, 45 - 47)
In January 2013, Applicant was evaluated by a family physician whom he has
seen since 2007 for general medical treatment. The physician determined, through
interviews and blood tests, that he showed no signs of alcohol dependence or physical
damage related to alcohol. 
In preparation for this hearing, Applicant was evaluated by a licensed clinical
psychologist on March 27, 2013. The evaluation included a 60-minute interview and a
60-minute testing session. An April 10, 2013 report of that evaluation included
disclosures by Applicant of his alcohol-related conduct that is consistent with the
investigative record. The psychologist observed that Applicant has been abstinent since
October 2012, but that he became psychologically (as opposed to physiologically)
dependent on alcohol because of stressors associated with his estrangement from his
family, the failure of his business ventures, and the end of his marriage. It was
recommended that he continue to abstain from alcohol, and he received a good
prognosis for doing so based on his candor about his abuse of alcohol and his insight
into the need for sobriety. (Gx. 5; Ax. L; Tr. 40 -41)
Much of Applicant’s alcohol-related misconduct occurred with high school and
college friends with whom he no longer associates. He now leads a lifestyle supportive
of sobriety. He has a girlfriend who does not drink, and he spends his free time engaged
in his hobbies and active outdoor activities. (Tr. 44 - 45, 48 - 50)
Applicant has an excellent personal and professional reputation. His co-workers,
company supervisors, and friends hold him in high regard for his hard work, reliability,
integrity, and honesty. In the workplace, he has shown initiative, leadership, and a
commitment to the mission his company supports. He also has demonstrated his
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
5
willingness and ability to abide by all regulations and procedures for safeguarding
classified information. Applicant has completed numerous technical training courses to
ensure he remains qualified for his assigned duties. His personal associates laud him
for being a good father, for his generosity, and for his work in the community, primarily
as a youth athletic coach. (Ax. C - K)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies6
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
6
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption
Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess, from 1989, when he was 17,
until April 2010, when he was 38. Thereafter, his drinking moderated until October 2012,
when he stopped drinking altogether. However, in 2011, he was diagnosed by ADSAP
as alcohol dependent, but continued drinking, albeit much less. His alcohol use resulted
in four arrests between 1989 and 2010. The record as a whole presents security
concerns about Applicant’s alcohol consumption that are stated at AG ¶ 21 as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
22 disqualifying conditions:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence; 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program; and 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
I have also considered the following AG ¶ 23 mitigating conditions:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
7
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant’s last abusive consumption of alcohol and alcohol-related misconduct
occurred in April 2010. Thereafter, he significantly curtailed his drinking until stopping
altogether ten months before his hearing. A favorable prognosis was provided in April
2013 by a licensed clinical psychologist based on a demonstrated commitment to
abstinence, and good insight into his dependence on alcohol. Applicant’s personal
circumstances have improved through the attenuation of personal stressors, such as his
divorce and his estrangement from his parents, and his new career with a defense
contractor. Applicant is active in AA, and he no longer associates with his drinking
buddies from high school and college. Also, he has a new girlfriend with whom he
enjoys a lifestyle supportive of continued sobriety. On balance, his abuse of alcohol and
adverse alcohol-related conduct are not likely to recur. Applicant has mitigated the
security concerns raised under this guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the available information and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline G. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 41 years old and
has established an excellent reputation for integrity, reliability, and candor. In the past
three years, he has recognized that he cannot continue to use alcohol. The worst
alcohol-related event in his background, his March 2002 DUI arrest, occurred amidst the
difficult circumstances of his pending divorce and his estrangement from his parents
and sister. Those circumstances no longer influence his conduct, and he has made
further positive changes in support of his abstinence from alcohol. Applicant has been
candid and open about all aspects of his adverse conduct, and he appears committed to
moving forward without alcohol. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record as
a whole shows that Applicant’s abuse of alcohol and his alcohol-related misconduct are
not likely to recur, and no longer present an unacceptable security concern.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Request for a security clearance is
granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
