 
1 
 
 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 12-04737 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
  
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns related to handling protected information and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guidelines K (handling 
protected information) and E (personal conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In 
her June 12, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three allegations under 
Guidelines K and E, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge of the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On July 25, 2013, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing, and I convened the hearing on July 30, 2013. I admitted two 
                                                          
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Government exhibits (GE 1-2), and three Applicant exhibits (AE A-C).2 DOHA received 
the transcript on August 7, 2013. 
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
 When notified by Department Counsel that her hearing was about to be 
scheduled, Applicant requested that it be held as soon as possible. I granted her 
request, and the written Notice of Hearing was issued five days before the hearing. 
During the hearing, Applicant affirmatively waived her right under §E3.1.8 of the 
Directive to receive notice 15 days before the hearing date. (Tr. 8-9)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 30 years old. She holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees in criminal 
justice, completed in 2005 and 2010, respectively. She is single and has no children. 
She served as an enlisted member of the Air Force from 2006 to 2010. She completed 
training as an imagery analyst in February 2007. That year, she was granted a top secret 
security clearance with special accesses, while in the Air Force. In December 2010, she 
began her current position as an imagery analyst for a defense contractor. Applicant had 
security training during her military career, as well as mandatory computer-based 
security training when she worked for the contractor. (GE 1; Tr. 18-24, 36) 
 
In spring 2007, Applicant was stationed at an Air Force base for her first 
assignment. She was taking career development courses (CDCs) to qualify for her 
position. The course materials were classified secret, and she was required to study 
them in a sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF). She studied in her off-duty 
hours. On two occasions, Applicant decided to remove several pages from one of the 
course binders and take them home to study, where she would be more comfortable. 
Because of her training in the proper handling of classified material, Applicant knew that 
what she did was prohibited. (GE 2; Tr. 24-30, 37, 39-40) 
 
In her interrogatory, Applicant noted, “However, once I had the materials in my 
possession, guilt does not even begin to describe what I felt.” She testified she kept the 
materials at home between one and four weeks. She was afraid of being caught if she 
brought the material back to the SCIF. She stated in her interrogatory, “I knew I had to 
destroy them.” She burned the material in her bathtub, and flushed the ashes down the 
drain. In her Answer, Applicant stated that her actions were not done “with malicious 
                                                          
2 At the hearing, Applicant had an unsigned copy of one of her character reference letters. She provided a 
signed copy after the hearing. Department Counsel had no objection to the signed version, which was the 
same as the unsigned version, other than the writer’s changed contact information. Both versions are 
included in AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
intent” but represented a “severe lapse in judgment.” She did not report her actions to 
her command, security officer, coworkers, family, or friends. (GE 2; Tr. 24-30, 37, 39-44) 
 
 Four years later, in October 2011, Applicant underwent a polygraph examination 
for her position with a defense contractor. She disclosed her 2007 removal, storage, and 
destruction of classified information. During her December 2011 security interview, 
Applicant disclosed her actions to the agent. She also stated that she, ”felt as if people 
knew” what she did, including her security officer. However, no one confronted her about 
the missing classified material. As of the hearing date, she had told only the security 
interviewer and the polygrapher. She did not report her actions because “I didn’t know 
what to say.” (GE 2; Tr. 30-31, 35-36, 40, 44) 
 
On about five occasions between 2007 and 2011, Applicant inadvertently carried 
her cell phone or camera into a secure area. She had received training that included the 
prohibition on carrying such items into a SCIF. When she realized she had the items with 
her, she took them out of the secure area and placed them in a locker, but did not report 
the incidents. Most of the incidents occurred while she served in the military. In her 
interrogatory response, she noted that these incidents were not done with malicious 
intent. She did not report these incidents because “I was not sure what to say or who I 
would report it to.” (GE 2; Tr. 27-28, 37-39) 
 
Applicant received a Certificate of Recognition for her outstanding performance 
for the federal agency that she supported from 2006 to 2013. A friend of nine years 
described her honesty and “tremendous integrity.” The chief of the branch she supports 
described her as “one of the best employees I have ever had” and noted her technical 
proficiency, ethics, and personal integrity. He opined that she could be trusted with the 
nation’s most sensitive information. Her manager for the past 18 months described her 
as a dedicated professional who has “. . . worked with classified information, and to the 
best of my knowledge, has done this while always upholding all of the rules and 
regulations for safeguarding such information. I certainly believe that she is trustworthy 
and capable of handling classified information.” The commander of Applicant's squadron, 
in a January 2010 letter, recommended Applicant as a remarkably talented and 
intelligent leader. He described her as “brilliant” in her “critical position“ exploiting 
combat-related intelligence. None of the writers who submitted references are aware of 
Applicant's security violations. (AE A-C) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
                                                          
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines K and E. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the 
national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access in favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information  
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern under Guideline K: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34, especially the 
following:  
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location;  
 
                                                          
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information;  
 
(h) negligent or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management; and 
 
(i) Failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
national Security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
. 
 In spring 2007, while serving as an enlisted member of the Air Force, Applicant 
removed secret material from a SCIF, transported it to her home, and stored it there for 
one to four weeks. During that period, the material was not secure and was vulnerable 
to disclosure. Fearing that returning the material to the SCIF would result in discovery of 
her violation, Applicant destroyed the classified material. She had received security 
training and was aware that she was violating security regulations. Despite this 
knowledge, she deliberately failed to comply with the rules. AG ¶¶ 34(b) and (g) apply. 
AG ¶ 34(h) partially applies because Applicant was negligent on the five occasions 
when she carried a cell phone or camera into a secure area. No counseling was 
involved, because Applicant did not inform her supervisor of these violations. AG ¶ 34(i) 
does not apply because the record contains no evidence regarding damage to the 
national security that resulted from Applicant's actions. 
 
 AG ¶ 35 provides the following conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 Applicant's actions did not occur under unusual circumstances, but rather in the 
regular course of her duties. She committed a security violation that continued for one to 
four weeks. Although the events occurred six years ago, the serious nature of the 
violation outweighs the lack of recency. Applicant's failure to follow restrictions regarding 
her cell phone and camera demonstrate a lax attitude toward her security 
responsibilities. Her actions reflect poorly on her reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. AG ¶ 35(a) does not apply. In addition, Applicant’s violations regarding 
classified material and her cell phone did not stem from inadequate training. AG ¶ 35(c) 
does not apply. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 As to AG ¶ 35(b), although Applicant has not received remedial training, her 
character references indicate that she is currently conscientious about security 
responsibilities. However, these evaluations must be viewed in light of the fact that none 
of the writers are aware of her security violations or her lack of candor in disclosing 
them. Applicant receives limited mitigation under AG ¶ 35(b). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information…. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern, including the following 
relevant condition: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior; . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations… ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 In 2007, Applicant deliberately failed to inform anyone in her command, including 
her security officer, that she had stored secret data in her home for one to four weeks, 
or that she had destroyed classified material. In 2010, after her employment by a 
defense contractor, she again decided not to inform her supervisor or facility security 
officer of her violations. Applicant's conduct showed poor judgment and lack of candor. 
Her concealment of the information for four years demonstrates a pattern of rule 
violations, and left her vulnerable to exploitation because exposure could have affected 
her military career. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (e) apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under the 
Personal Conduct guideline: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 As discussed under Guideline K, Applicant's conduct occurred during the regular 
course of her duties, not in unique circumstances. Her violations were not minor, 
because they involved exposing secret data to disclosure. Although they are not recent, 
their gravity outweighs the lack of recency. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant realizes the serious nature of her conduct. Although there is no record 
evidence of counseling, she is genuinely remorseful for her actions. There is no 
evidence that she has violated security regulations since 2007, and it is highly unlikely 
that she will engage in such behavior in the future. AG ¶ 17(d) applies. 
 
However, AG ¶ 17(e) cannot be applied because, as of the hearing date, 
Applicant had failed to reveal her conduct to anyone since her disclosure to the security 
interviewer and polygrapher in 2011. Without such disclosure, she remains vulnerable 
to exploitation. Applicant's security violations, and failure to disclose them, raise doubts 
about her reliability and judgment, and outweigh the mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the case. 
 
 Applicant displayed lax security habits by repeatedly bringing her cell phone or 
camera in a secure area. However, her most serious violation occurred when she 
deliberately removed classified material from a SCIF and stored it for one to four weeks 
in her home, where it was not secure and was subject to disclosure. She credibly 
testified that she was immediately aware of the gravity of her acts, and felt guilty and 
remorseful. Applicant was 24 years old at the time, and her youth and inexperience 
undoubtedly played a part in her decisions. However, she was also an intelligent woman 
who had been trained in security procedures and regulations. Instead of returning the 
material and admitting her violations, she compounded the violation by burning the 
classified material, and concealing her conduct from her command and her employer for 
years. The fact that she still has not been candid with her employer about her past 
conduct raises concerns. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the cited security concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available 
information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows she has not 
satisfied the doubts raised. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a  – 1.b  Against  Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
