KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge committed a significant number of errors in his findings of fact.  Given the
number of errors, Applicant has a reasonable basis for questioning whether the Judge accurately
evaluated the record evidence when deciding the case.  The Board concludes that the totality of
fact-related error in the Judge’s decision was harmful.   Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 12-04780.a1
DATE: 08/21/2013
DATE: August 21, 2013
In Re:
----------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04780
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 23, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June
17, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Marc E. Curry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.   
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge committed harmful
error when making numerous findings of fact that are not supported by the record evidence; and (2)
whether the Judge applied Guideline B mitigating conditions properly.  For the following reasons,
the Board remands the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 47 years old.  He was born and raised in the PRC. He received
a bachelor’s degree in physics and fiber optics and a master’s degree in fiber optics before
immigrating to the United States to pursue a doctorate.  He received his doctorate in the field of fiber
optics.  He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009.  His wife immigrated to the U.S. in 1999.
Applicant’s wife immigrated to the United States in 1999 and his daughter immigrated here
one year later.  Both are lawful U.S. permanent residents and have applied for citizenship.
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of the PRC.  They are retired farmers.  Applicant talks
to them approximately twice per week.  Applicant purchased a house in the PRC for his parents,
which is currently worth approximately $30,000.  He transferred ownership of the house to his father
in 2013.  Applicant provided between $1,000 and $2,500 of annual financial support to his parents.
Now that he is aware of the potential security implications of providing financial support to his
parents, Applicant has no intention to support them financially in the future. 
Applicant has three brothers who are citizens and residents of the PRC.  Applicant talks to
his brothers approximately once every three months, and e-mails them approximately once or twice
a week.  
Applicant has four paternal aunts who are citizens and residents of the PRC.  He talks to
them approximately twice per year on holidays.  He never knew them that well when he lived in the
PRC, and does not know their first names.  Applicant’s parents-in-law and brother-in-law are
citizens and residents of the PRC.  Applicant talks to his parents-in-law approximately once per
month and communicates with his brother-in-law through e-mails once or twice per year.  
Applicant stays in touch with four of his colleagues from the company where he worked
from 1990 to 1996.  All of them have either retired or left the company.  Two are living in the
United States and are permanent residents.  Applicant has not seen three of them since 1998 and has
not seen the remaining co-worker in six years.  He communicates with them approximately once or
twice a year via phone or e-mail.
Applicant has visited the PRC three times since immigrating to the United States.  Most
recently, he traveled in November 2009. 
The PRC is a totalitarian state that routinely violates human rights.  It is the most aggressive
conductor of espionage against the United States in the world, and its intelligence collection efforts
are growing in scale, intensity, and sophistication.   
1See Applicant’s answer to the SOR, dated March 12, 2013.
2See Tr. at p. 53.
3See Tr. at p. 29-30, 53-54; App. Ex. F;  
4See Tr. at p. 35.
The Judge concluded: Applicant’s relatives who are PRC citizens and residents, and his wife
and daughter, who are PRC residents living with him, raise security concerns under Guideline B.
However, Applicant no longer owns property in the PRC and no longer provides financial support
to his parents.  Applicant’s past employment while living in the PRC does not generate a security
concern.  Applicant’s contacts with his former friends and coworkers and his contacts with his aunts
in the PRC are sufficiently infrequent so as to be mitigated.  
Since immigrating to the United States in 2009, Applicant’s wife has been a pillar of her
community.  Applicant’s wife and daughter live in the U.S., are integrated into their community, and
are involved with charitable activities.  These factors mitigate security concerns under Guideline B.
Given the aggressive and multifaceted nature of the PRC’s espionage activities against the
United States, it cannot be concluded that any of the mitigating conditions are applicable to any of
the remaining relatives of Applicant in the PRC.  These include Applicant’s parents and brothers as
well as his mother-in-law and father-in-law.  
Applicant takes issue with six of the Judge’s findings of fact in the findings of fact section
of the Judge’s decision, and one finding of fact found in the analysis section.  These will be
discussed in turn.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he e-mails his brothers in the PRC once or
twice per week.  He states, and the record supports, his assertion that he contacts his brothers via e-
mail once or twice per year.1  Applicant has established error with regard to this finding of fact.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he last visited the PRC in November 2009.  He
states, and the record supports, his claim that he last traveled to the PRC in June 2008.2  Applicant
has established error with regard to this finding of fact. 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he stays in touch with four of his colleagues
from the company where he worked from 1990 to 1996.  He states, and the record supports, his
contention that he stays in touch with four of his colleagues from the company where he worked
from 1996-1998.3  Applicant has established error with regard to this finding of fact.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he earned a bachelor’s degree in physics and
fiber optics.  He states, and the record supports, his assertion that he earned a bachelor’s degree in
physics and optics.4  Applicant has established error with regard to this finding of fact.
5See Tr. at p. 34.
6See Tr. at p. 33.
7See Tr. at p. 66.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he earned a master’s degree in fiber optics.
He states, and the record supports, his claim that he earned a master’s degree in physics laser.5
Applicant  has established error with regard to this finding of fact.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he earned his doctorate in the field of fiber
optics.  He states, and the record supports, his contention that he received his doctorate in the field
of physics and optics.6  Applicant has established error with regard to this finding of fact.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s factual assertion in the analysis section of his decision that
Applicant’s wife immigrated to the United States in 2009.  This is at variance with the Judge’s
earlier finding of fact that Applicant’s wife immigrated in about 1999.  The record supports the
earlier finding that the wife came to this country in 1999.7  Applicant has established error with
regard to the Judge’s statement of fact in the analysis section.  
Even if some of the errors do not bear directly upon the security significant issues in the case,
they are part of a larger pattern where the Judge committed a significant number of errors in his
findings of fact.  The Board does not review isolated sentences of a Judge’s decision.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 03-05645 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 2004).  Applicant rightly argues that the several
errors pertaining to dates had the potential to affect the Judge’s analysis of the case.  Given the
number of errors, Applicant has a reasonable basis for questioning whether the Judge accurately
evaluated the record evidence as a whole when deciding the case.  Compare, ISCR Case No. 02-
071919 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2004).  The Board concludes that the totality of fact-related error
in the Judge’s decision was harmful.  
Given the cumulative nature of the errors identified by Applicant, the appropriate remedy
is to remand the case to the Judge with instructions to issue a new decision (consistent with the
requirements of Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, ¶¶ E3.1.25 and E3.1.35) after correction
of identified errors and a reconsideration of the record as a whole.  It is premature to address the
remaining issue raised by Applicant. 
Order
The decision of the Judge is REMANDED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
