 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11676 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 10, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 24, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 5, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on July 17, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were admitted into evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F that 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left open until July 31, 
2013, to provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. She submitted 
further documents that were marked as AE G through K and admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 25, 2013. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement in 
Paragraph E3.1.8 of the Directive.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. In the 
past, she has worked on-and-off for defense contractors overseas. Although she was 
unemployed at the time of the hearing, a defense contractor was sponsoring her for a 
security clearance so that she could work for that company again overseas. She 
completed the 11th grade of high school and obtained a general educational 
development (GED) certificate in 1990. She is divorced and has four daughters, ages 
12, 19, 21, and 24. She is seeking a security clearance for the first time.2  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 
2006 and had 12 delinquent debts totaling $37,052. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted 12 of the SOR allegations with comments. She denied the allegation 
in SOR ¶ 1.g, a collection account in the amount of $12,785. Her admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.3 
 
 Shortly after separating from an abusive husband in October 1996, Applicant 
opened a restaurant with her grandparents. She was 24 years old at the time. The 
restaurant was small, but became successful. In her words, it did “good,” “not 
phenomenal.” It was featured on television and in magazines and received awards. 
Celebrities patronized it. She noted that, if customers did not have enough money to eat 
there, she still fed them because that is the way she was raised. For over five years, 
she also worked as an evening supervisor at a hotel, but eventually gave up that job to 
focus on the restaurant.4 
 
 In February 1998, Applicant was involved in a serious vehicle accident. She was 
ejected from the vehicle and mistakenly pronounced dead at the scene. She incurred 
major medical bills as a result of that accident. Additionally, her grandfather, who 
worked at the restaurant and assisted it financially, developed chronic medical problems 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 13-14, 71. 
 
2 Tr. at 7-8, 36, 72-73; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
4 Tr. at 19-22, 37, 40-42, 44-47; GE 1; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
and eventually passed away in February 2004. She stated that she was responsible for 
some of her grandfather’s medical bills and his funeral expenses. After her grandfather 
passed away, the restaurant began encountering financial problems. In the spring of 
2005, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She received a bankruptcy discharge in 
2006. About $15,000 of her debts was discharged in that bankruptcy.5 
 
 Due to a downturn in the economy, Applicant’s restaurant closed in February 
2010. After the restaurant closed, she was unemployed until April 2010. From April 
2010 to December 2011, she worked for a defense contractor as a billeting and logistics 
technician in Iraq. In that job, she earned about $60,000 annually. Following that job, 
she was unemployed again from January 2012 to July 2012. In August 2012, she began 
working for another defense contractor as a site manager at a military base in 
Kyrgyzstan. She has been unemployed since that job ended.6 
 
 Applicant disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, a collection account in the 
amount of $12,785. She testified this was her daughter’s medical bill that was incurred 
when her daughter was an adult. This bill was incurred while Applicant was working 
overseas. She contacted the collection company, explained the circumstances 
surrounding its incurrence, and was told that the collection account would be taken off 
of her credit report. It was deleted from her most recent credit report.7 
 
 Applicant satisfied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($203) and 1.k ($142). Her 
most recent credit report indicated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j was discharged in her 
bankruptcy. With the exception of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($270), all of the remaining 
unresolved debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m) became delinquent in 
either 2007 or 2008.8 
 
 Applicant testified that she was responsible for the remaining unresolved debts 
and intended to pay them when she was financially able to do so. She indicated that 
she has sold jewelry to pay bills. One of her daughters wrote a letter indicating that their 
family would at times have no electricity at home so that Applicant could pay bills at the 
restaurant. Applicant has received financial counseling from a debt consolidation 
company. The company has prepared a debt consolidation program that includes the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, and 1.l. Applicant also testified that she is negotiating with 
the creditor of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f for a settlement amount so that it could be included 
in the debt consolidation program. Her intent is to institute the debt consolidation 
program upon obtaining her next job.9  
                                                          
5 Tr. at 40-42, 44-50; GE 2.  
 
6 Tr. at 19-22, 50-54; GE 1, 2, 3. Applicant testified that the restaurant closed in June 2009, but 
her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) indicated her employment there ended 
in February 2010. See Tr. at 35-36. 
 
7 Tr. at 21, 54-57, 67-69; GE 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 20, 61-63, 65; GE 2, 3, 4, 5; AE C, D.   
 
9 Tr. at 21-22, 57-61, 63-70; GE 2; AE E.  
 
4 
 
 In her post-hearing submission, Applicant provided an email from a health care 
provider that indicated they had no record of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. One collection 
agency is handling the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.m. Applicant provided 
documentation showing she made payments of $10 and $15 to that collection agency 
and indicated that she will continue to make payments as she is able to do so. She also 
provided documentation showing she submitted a complaint to a state department of 
consumer affairs asking that they conduct an inquiry to determine whether the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.g was the result of deceptive trade practices.10 
 
  Applicant testified openly and honestly about her financial situation. She 
currently resides with her grandmother, uncle, and youngest daughter. She is the 
primary provider for the household. She has received no child support from the fathers 
of her children. Her three eldest daughters began living on their own shortly after she 
returned from Iraq.11 
 
 Applicant presented a number of letters of reference. The mayor pro tem of a 
major city has known her for a number of years and stated that he was “impressed with 
her integrity, business acumen and her sense of duty and responsibility to her faith, 
family, and community.” Other friends, co-workers, and community members echoed his 
comments. They praise her for her selfless service and her dedication to helping 
others.12  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor in Iraq described her as dedicated and capable of handling 
any situation with thoughtfulness and maturity. She received a number of letters of 
appreciation for her overseas employment. Her senior project manager in Iraq stated:  
 
[Applicant’s] personal sacrifice during this time brings great credit to 
[herself and the defense contractor]. I am confident that history will show 
the incredible contributions the civilian contractors such as you have 
brought to the battlefield as part of the Logistical Civilian Augmentation 
Program III and in support of the global war on terrorism.13 
 
 The executive director of an abused women’s shelter noted that Appellant 
volunteered to be a spokesperson for the shelter, served on its board of directors, and 
donated the use of a room in her restaurant for fundraising events.14 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 AE G-K. 
 
11 Tr. at 38-40, 43-44, 53-54; AE A. 
 
12 AE A. 
 
13 AE A, B.  
 
14 Tr. at 57-59; AE G.  
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2006. Since then, she 
accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable to satisfy for a number of years. This 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
7 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. Instead, it is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.15 
An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt 
alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve the financial 
problems and take sufficient action to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an 
applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first.16 
 
Due to an economic downturn, Applicant’s restaurant, which she operated for 
about 14 years, failed and closed in 2010. All of the unresolved debts, except for a $270 
consumer debt, date back to the financial difficulties she incurred while operating her 
restaurant. Following the closure of the restaurant, she was unemployed for about three 
months. She then worked for a defense contractor in Iraq for about 21 months. On her 
salary of $60,000 per year, she supported herself, her grandmother, four daughters, and 
uncle. After her job in Iraq, she was unemployed for about six months before working 
overseas again for another defense contractor in Kyrgyzstan.   
 
While Applicant has struggled financially in recent years, she has done the best 
she could with her limited resources. She has lived within her means and incurred no 
new delinquent debts. She sold her jewelry to pay bills. She satisfied the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.e, and 1.k and made small payments on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.m. She has 
disputed the two largest debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($18,869) and 1.g ($12,785). The debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.g has been removed from her credit report, while the dispute concerning the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is apparently being processed. She has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She testified that she will resolve her delinquent debts. I found her to be 
a credible witness. Those debts were incurred a long time ago under circumstances that 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Upon 
obtaining her prospective employment, her financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG 
¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
16 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
8 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
The whole-person evidence in this case is compelling. Applicant is a selfless 
individual. She consistently makes personal sacrifices to place the needs of others 
ahead of her own. She twice served overseas in harsh conditions. By working in Iraq, 
she put herself in harm’s way to support U.S. military personnel. She is seeking to work 
overseas again to help our troops. She is a person of character and integrity who will 
honor her commitments. The evidence shows that she is a reliable and trustworthy 
individual who exercises good judgment. In short, both the applicable mitigating 
conditions and the whole-person analysis support a favorable clearance decision. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
   
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
