                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 12-12302
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 20, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
           Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on June 1, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 5)  On April 4, 2013, the Department  of
Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline B for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on May 1, 2013, and elected to have
the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on May 29,
2013.  Applicant received the FORM on June 24, 2013.  Applicant was instructed to
submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.
Applicants submitted a response to the FORM dated July 8, 2013.  This case was
assigned to the undersigned on July 24, 2013.  Based upon a review of the pleadings,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
 
2
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
concerning the current political conditions in Afghanistan.  (See FORM.)  There was no
objection from Applicant.  (See Applicant’s Answer to FORM.)  The request and the
attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDING OF FACTS
The Applicant is 66 years old and has a Bachelor’s Degree in Civil Engineering.
He is employed with a defense contractor and holds the position as an Interpreter, and
a security clearance in necessary in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence, which could result in the
compromise of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Gulbahar, Afghanistan.  He was raised in Kabul,
Afghanistan and graduated from the University there.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  From
1974-1975 he served a mandatory year of Afghan military service.  After his military
service, he was employed by the Afghan government as an engineer.  In 1982,
Applicant moved to a refugee camp in Pakistan because he felt his neighbors and co-
workers were suspicious of his western contacts.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  In 1984, he
married his wife, also born in Afghanistan.  They have four children, two were born in
Pakistan and are now naturalized U.S. citizens, and two were born in the U.S. and are
citizens here.  In 1988, Applicant and his family immigrated to the U.S. as refugees.  He
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1994 and has had a United States passport since
1995.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  His wife is also a naturalized U.S. citizen.  
Applicant has 21 family members who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.
Applicant indicates that he has maintained contact with many of these family members
reporting differing frequencies of contact ranging from none to monthly, quarterly to bi-
annually.  (Government Exhibit 4.)   
Applicant’s step-mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan.  He has one
brother and five sisters who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.  He has a half-
brother who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan and serves as an officer in the
Afghan National Army.  He also has two half-sisters who are citizens and residents of
Afghanistan.  He has one sister-in-law and eight brothers-in-law who are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan.  One brother-in-law has served in the Afghan National Army
since 2010.  Another one of his brothers-in-law works as a guard for the government of
3
Afghanistan.  He also has an uncle and a nephew who are citizens and residents of
Afghanistan.  (Government Exhibit 4.) 
Applicant indicated that he last saw some of his relatives in Afghanistan in 2007.
He further indicated that he had contact with all of his family members listed in the SOR
in 2010, except one sister.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  In 2012, he was only in contact
with one of his sisters, about once every three months.  He stated that he contacted two
of his other sisters once in a while, and his brother-in-law twice a year.  He states that
he has good relationships with his step-mother, brother, sisters, step-brother and step-
sisters, and his uncle and nephew.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  
There are, however, several big discrepancies in the information provided by the
Applicant concerning the frequency of his contacts with his family members.
(Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant’s Answer conflicts with the information he provided in
2010 when he reported contact with his step-mother once every three months, but in his
Answer says that his last contact was in 2007.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  In his Answer,
Applicant states that he contacts his brother on a monthly basis, his sister once a month
to once or twice a year, to once in a while, and with his half-brother from once a month
to once about every four months to once in awhile.  In regard to his brother-in-law, who
is employed as a guard for the Afghan government, in 2010 Applicant reported that he
had contact with him once a month.  In his Answer, he stated he had not had contact
with him since 2007.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  In his Answer, Applicant admits that he
has eight brothers-in-law who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan, including one
who has served in the Afgan Army since 2010.  Applicant’s indicated in 2012 that this
brother-in-law is deceased.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  However, in his 2013 Answer,
Applicant’s stated that he last saw him in 2007 and that the Afghan Army is supporting
the US to fight against insurgency.  Based upon this response, Applicant’s brother-in-
law will be presumed alive.  In 2010, Applicant indicated that he has contact with his
brother-in-law who works as a guard for the Afghan Government about once a month.
In 2012, he indicates that he has no contact.  Based upon this series of conflicting
information, it is difficult to determine what is really going on.           
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that before his father passed
away in 2010, he called his father almost monthly to talk with him.  At that time, he also
spoke to his step-mother and half-brother who lived with him.  He states that after his
father passed away in 2010, his interest in contacting his relatives was much more
limited.  However, he does not feel it was right to just forget them.  (See Applicant’s
Response to FORM.) 
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is an Islamic republic.  It has been an independent nation since August 19,
1919, after the British relinquished control.  In December 1979, Soviet forces invaded
and occupied Afghanistan.  Afghan freedom fighters, known as mujaheddin, opposed
the communist regime.  The resistance movement eventually led to the Geneva
Accords, signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union.  In
mid-1990's the Taliban rose to power largely due to the anarchy and the divisions of the
country among warlords that arose after the Soviet withdrawal.  The Taliban sought to
impose an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire country and committed massive
human rights violations.  The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden
4
since the mid-1990's, to al-Qa’ida generally, and to other terrorist organizations.  After
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, U.S. demands that Afghanistan expel Bin-laden
and his followers were rejected by the Taliban.  U.S. forces and a coalition partnership
commenced military operations in October 2001 that forced the Taliban out of power by
November 2001.  
Although there has been some progress since the Taliban was deposed,
Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges, principally defeating terrorists and
insurgents, recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and rebuilding a shattered
physical, economic and political infrastructure.  Human rights problems included
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; poor prison conditions; widespread official
impunity; ineffective government investigations of local security forces; arbitrary arrest
and detention; judicial corruption; violation of privacy rights; restrictions of freedom of
religion; limits on freedom of movement; violence and societal discrimination against
women; sexual abuse of children; abuses against minorities; trafficking in persons;
abuse of worker rights; and child labor.  Overall, the State Department has declared that
the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, and travel to
all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, landmines,
banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups and the possibility of terrorist
attacks.   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
7.(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.
7.(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
5
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The voluntariness of participation;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
6
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be subject to foreign influence that may lead to poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s situation and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
 Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's connections to Afghanistan, I
conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has failed to introduce persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline B of the SOR.
Under Foreign Influence, Guideline B, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 7.(b)
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.
Applicant is in contact with a number of his family members in Afghanistan within
any given year.  In 2007, he had contact with some of his relatives in Afghanistan.  In
2010, he had contact with all of his relatives there.  In 2013, he continues to be in
contact with many of them.  Even though the Applicant’s immediate family that includes
his wife and children reside in the United States, he maintains a close familial
relationship with his many relatives in Afghanistan.  Applicant obviously has an
emotional bond and close association with his foreign family members.  The conditions
in Afghanistan are volatile and dangerous due primarily to the significant economic,
political, and military unrest, as well as the ongoing robust terrorist threat.  These
conditions, coupled with the Applicant’s ongoing familial ties to his relatives in
Afghanistan, present a risk that he may be placed in a position of choosing between his
interests, and the interests of the United States, either through influence brought upon
them by outside forces, or influence they may try to assert given their ties to
Afghanistan.  Therefore, his foreign contacts do  pose a security risk.  Under the
heightened scrutiny analysis, the Applicant’s numerous family members in Afghanistan
7
pose a significant security risk.  In addition there is conflict and discrepancies in the
evidence provided by the Applicant concerning the frequency of his contact with his
foreign relatives.  Whether the problem be one of credibility or simply the language
barrier, the Government cannot take the risk.  Furthermore, Applicant has not provided
sufficient evidence to mitigate these concerns.  Except for his self-serving statements,
there is no independent evidence in the record concerning his professional record,
letters of recommendation on any level, his connections to the United States, or any
updated information concerning his relationships with various family members in
Afghanistan.  Without such, I find against the Applicant under Guideline B. 
  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  The
evidence fails to mitigate the negative effects his foreign influence can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.    
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.    
       Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.    
        Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.    
       Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.    
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.    
8
CONCLUSION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
