 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-00251 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the guidelines for 
drug use, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
In June 2012, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). On 
March 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Use), Guideline G 
(Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In an April 9, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations 
raised under Guideline H, two of the four allegations raised under Guideline G, and the 
 
2 
 
 
sole allegation raised under Guideline J. He also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 7, 2013, 
setting the hearing for June 25, 2013. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1-4. They were accepted without objection. Applicant 
gave testimony and offered six documents, which were accepted into the record as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-F without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 
8, 2013, and the record was closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old junior program analyst working for a defense 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 2000. He has since earned an associate’s 
degree in business administration, is currently completing a bachelor’s degree, and 
recently was accepted into a master’s program in a related area of study. Applicant is 
married. In anticipation of the hearing, Applicant executed a Statement of Intent not to 
use illegal drugs in the future that conforms to the description set forth in AG ¶ 26(b)(4). 
 
 Born in 1982, Applicant is the product of a broken home. His mother was briefly 
married to a stepfather with whom Applicant remains close. In the past couple of years, 
the stepfather became a significant and positive influence in Applicant’s life with regard 
to Applicant’s educational field and professional aspirations.  
 
 During high school, Applicant began using drugs. At about age 15 in May 1997, 
he started using marijuana, a drug he would continue to use intermittently before 
quitting its use in September 2011. At times, he purchased marijuana for personal use. 
In March 1998, when he was 16 years of age, Applicant was arrested for felony 
possession with intent to distribute marijuana. At court, in September 1998, he was 
found guilty of misdemeanor possession of marijuana. He was fined and his driver’s 
license was suspended for a year.  
 
Following high school graduation in 2000, Applicant began a series of full-time 
jobs as a waiter or bartender. When he could afford it, he would simultaneously take 
college courses. He fell prey to the party lifestyle often associated with bars and the 
service industry, which protracted his educational program. He first bought and used 
cocaine in January 2002, a drug he sporadically would use within the restaurant and bar 
milieu until January 2008. (Tr. 41, 58) On or about June 10, 2002, Applicant was 
arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) while operating a motor vehicle, then 
found guilty of that offense in October 2002. He was fined, sentenced to 30 days in jail 
with 30 days suspended, and his license was suspended for a year. He attended an 
alcohol awareness class following his conviction. 
 
On or about July 1, 2006, Applicant was in his early 20s and driving home. (Tr. 
34) He had consumed some alcohol but did not think he was under the influence. He 
was pulled over for a broken headlight. He was asked to take a sobriety test, which he 
failed to pass. Applicant was arrested for DUI and operating while impaired. He pled 
 
3 
 
 
guilty to a charge of DUI, while the lesser charge was dismissed. He was fined $300, 
charged $200 for a suspension, and ordered to pay $100 to a victim impact panel. He 
was sentenced to 90 days in jail, with all time suspended. He was also placed on 
probation for a year and ordered to attend alcohol awareness classes. He has not 
driven after using alcohol since that time. During his alcohol class, he was advised to 
abstain from alcohol use, which he did for the duration of the course. (Tr. 37, 65-66) 
Applicant does not recall being diagnosed as an alcohol abuser (Tr. 52), but materials 
from an alcohol course reflect he was. (Tr. 66-67). He recalls no aftercare suggestions, 
but knows he attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) during and after the 2006 class. 
 
Applicant was arrested for reckless driving in August 2006 while driving home 
from work. It was dark, the road was not busy, and he had no idea how fast he was 
going. He did not believe he was speeding, so he later had his speedometer checked. It 
was found to be faulty. Consequently, he was only found guilty of speeding and fined. 
(Tr. 30-31) By the end of the year, he had finished his alcohol class. His “major 
takeaway from” the class was that “he needed to wise up” and mature. (Tr. 52) Finally, 
between March 2009 and June 2011, he used Vicodin prescribed for another person 
three times, to relax and to treat genuine back pain.  
 
By 2011, Applicant made the conscious decision “to get serious” about his future. 
(Tr. 45) He belatedly began to demonstrate signs of maturity as he faced both 
graduation and his engagement to a fellow program analyst who does not approve of 
drugs. (Tr. 57) His lifestyle choices had protracted his education and almost ended his 
engagement. He accepted that “there was no possibility of having a good future while 
continuing to use drugs.” (Tr. 45) He willingly became committed to not letting his former 
lifestyle adversely impact his life again. (Tr. 59) Applicant married in June 2011.  
 
By the time he graduated with his associate’s degree in late 2011, Applicant had 
moderated his alcohol use, quit using all illegal drugs, and distanced himself from the 
party lifestyle. Applicant’s wife does not permit drugs in or around their home and has 
been highly supportive. (Tr. 57, 78) He has made new friends. (Tr. 53) He initially chose 
to continue working at one upscale bar only because it was lucrative. Shortly after 
graduation, he began a professional position as a junior program analyst. Mentored by 
his stepfather, he earnestly dedicated his efforts to the challenging position. Success in 
that position led Applicant to an offer by his present employer for a position as a 
specialized program analyst. Despite the easy income supplement, he quit bartending in 
December 2012 to focus on his new job and professional lifestyle. (Tr. 47)  
 
Applicant no longer follows the club and bar scene. He continues to drink alcohol 
responsibly. About twice a month, he will imbibe if he goes “out to dinner with my mom 
or something special like that I’ll have a pre-dinner drink. . . . (on) special occasions or 
something.” (Tr. 36). He actively eschews drugs and those who use them. (Tr. 28-29) 
He has “had to end quite a few friendships because of their use of drugs and heavy 
drinking.” (Tr. 29) The few friendships he maintains from before graduation are with 
people who “no longer use drugs or never did in the first place.” (Tr. 29) He attributes 
his turnaround to maturation and the onset of adult responsibilities related to his 
 
4 
 
 
profession and marriage. He does not miss drugs or the party lifestyle. He has no 
intention to use drugs again or to relapse to that type of life. He recognizes that to do so 
would undermine his job, his marriage, his current happiness, and any security 
clearance granted. Applicant fully appreciates that using drugs and abusing alcohol 
demonstrate poor judgment, which is an important security concern. (Tr. 85) He credibly 
stated that “there is nothing that would make me go back to using drugs.” (Tr. 84) He 
looks back on his period of alcohol and drug abuse as being “miserable” and an 
“embarrassment.” (Tr. 88) In contrast, he has never been as happy and content as he is 
presently. (Tr. 88) He will not jeopardize that happiness, his marriage, or his career. At 
work, he is a valued employee noted for his dedication, loyalty, and skills. (Exs. A-D) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and derived 
from the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 24) “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior altering 
substances and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and 
other substances. (AG ¶ 24(a)(1-2)) “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24(b)) 
 
Here, Applicant admits intermittently using marijuana, cocaine, and Vicodin, as 
well as occasionally purchasing marijuana for personal use. Such facts are sufficient to 
raise Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse); 25(c) 
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia); and 25(d) (diagnosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of a 
drug abuse or drug dependency). With disqualifying conditions raised, the burden shifts 
to Applicant to mitigate related security concerns. 
 
For Applicant, high school experimentation with marijuana expanded as he 
embraced the service industry lifestyle after graduation. That lifestyle perpetuated a 
degree of immaturity, as he protracted completion of an associate’s degree in favor of a 
string of restaurant and bar jobs. Maturity did not strike him until, almost simultaneously, 
he completed his associate’s degree, almost lost a fiancée who opposed the use of 
drugs, and he faced the fact it was time to complete a bachelor’s degree and start a 
professional career. With marriage and his profession as his main motivators, he quit 
using drugs, separated himself from the bar scene, made a new set of friends, 
eschewed those friends he formerly associated with drug use, and concentrated on his 
wife and work. He accepted guidance from his stepfather and changed his life. He 
became committed to keeping both his wife and his job no matter what it takes. He will 
not jeopardize either by returning to drug use. He credibly expressed his intent to 
remain drug-free. He has stayed drug-free for nearly two years. He executed a 
Statement of Intent not to use drugs in the future in conformance with AG ¶ 26(b)(4). I 
find Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long 
 
6 
 
 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment); AG ¶ 26(b)(1) (disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts); AG ¶ 26(b)(2) (changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used); AG ¶ 26(b)(3) (an appropriate period of abstinence) and AG ¶ 26(b)(4) (a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) apply. 
  
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21) In this case, Applicant was twice 
charged with DUI and once with reckless driving between 2002 and 2006. He was 
determined to be an alcohol abuser during an alcohol awareness class. He admits that 
he has imbibed to the point of excess. Although seven years have passed since he 
made a concerted effort not to drive if he has imbibed any alcohol, and generally began 
moderating his use of alcohol, such facts are sufficient to raise Alcohol Consumption 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) and AG ¶ 22(c) (the habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent). Consequently, the 
burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate related security concerns. 
 
Although Applicant does not recall receiving a diagnosis for alcohol abuse, he 
concedes that he used alcohol in excess in the past. He acknowledges that after 
receiving alcohol instruction in 2006, he intentionally took steps to not drive while 
drinking and to generally moderate his alcohol consumption. Today, he remains a 
moderate imbiber of alcohol. Alcohol has not adversely impacted his life in nearly seven 
years. Keeping his wife and his job provide him with high incentives for actively 
monitoring his alcohol use. He will not relapse or do anything that might jeopardize his 
marriage, job, or career. Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so 
much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or  good judgment) and AG ¶ 23(b) (the 
individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides 
evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of 
abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)) applly. 
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is that criminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(AG ¶ 30) In this case, Applicant intermittently used and purchased marijuana, used 
 
7 
 
 
cocaine, abused Vicodin, was twice arrested for DUI, and was charged with reckless 
driving, but fined for speeding. This is sufficient to raise both Criminal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) 
and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). Consequently, it is 
Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security concerns raised. 
 
 Applicant admits the criminal conduct noted above. He only distinguishes the 
reckless driving charge because, after his speedometer was determined to be faulty, it 
was ultimately dropped in lieu of a speeding ticket. As noted under Guideline H and 
Guideline G, above, however, Applicant has turned his life around with regards to drugs 
and alcohol. He has used alcohol responsibly for several years and been drug-free for 
two years. He avoids people and places associated with drug and alcohol abuse. He 
has met a new circle of friends. His old, immature habits have been replaced by the 
adult responsibilities associated with marriage and responsible work position. He is 
thriving at work and is soon to complete his bachelor’s degree. He is committed to both 
his marriage and his job. He will not do anything to jeopardize either. He relishes his 
new life and is appropriately contrite over his years abusing alcohol and drugs. In light 
of these factors and Applicant’s overall turnaround, supported by both his stepfather 
and wife, I find that AG ¶ 31(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including 
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or high education, good employment record, or constructive 
community performance) applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my comments under the three above-referenced guidelines in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some 
warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old junior program analyst working for a defense 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 2000. He is currently completing a 
bachelor’s degree and has been accepted into a master’s degree program. He is 
married. The alcohol, drug, and criminal-related activities of issue occurred between the 
time Applicant was about 15 until his late 20s. During that period, Applicant was a waiter 
and bartender at various establishments who took occasional college courses. He 
meandered without direction or focus for a number of years, until the prospect of 
graduation, marriage, and adult responsibilities came simultaneously into view in 2011.  
 
8 
 
 
 
Applicant learned to handle alcohol in moderation in his mid-20s. It was the 
prospect of facing adult responsibilities at the end of his 20s, however, that directly led 
him to turn his life around for the better. He quit using drugs, turned away from the 
bartending lifestyle, and made new friends. He married a supportive woman who has 
zero tolerance for drugs. He accepted his stepfather’s mentorship in moving away from 
the service industry in favor of a professional career path. He embraced the positions he 
found in his chosen field and has quickly adapted to the professional lifestyle. He fully 
recognizes that a security clearance is a privilege built on trust, and appreciates the 
meaning of his signed Statement of Intent. He will not jeopardize his marriage or career. 
I am confident that Applicant will not again abuse alcohol or drugs, or conduct himself in 
any way that raises genuine security concerns. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under drug involvement, alcohol 
consumption, and criminal conduct guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
