                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-06496 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esq. and Claire Shapiro, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
J, Criminal Conduct and D, Sexual Behavior. He mitigated the security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 22, 2008 and January 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guidelines J, D, and B. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 6, 2008 and January 30, 2009, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.1 The case was assigned to me 
on January 22, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 10, 2009, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on March 9, 2009. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant’s attorney had no objections to GE 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6, 
but objected to GE 2. I overruled the objection and all of the Government’s exhibits were 
admitted.2 The Government also requested administrative notice be taken of exhibits 
marked as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through VI, which was granted. Applicant testified 
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F. Department Counsel did not object and they 
were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 17, 2009.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in 1.a and 2.a of the SOR and admitted the 
allegations in 3.a and 3.b of the amended SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the 
allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old network engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since 2000. He has resided in Korea since 1993, where he worked for a 
different defense contractor before changing jobs to work for his present employer. 
Applicant explained that his job required him to work very long hours every day, six and 
sometimes seven days a week. He would normally work 10-12 hours each day.3  
 
Applicant met his wife, who was from the Philippines, through a coworker, who 
was married to her sister. Applicant and his wife dated for four months before being 
married in the Philippines in1995. He testified that his new brother-in-law warned him 
that when he married a Filipina woman he essentially married the whole family and he 
would be expected to provide financial support to her extended family in the Philippines. 
He and his wife would return periodically to visit her family in the Philippines. He 
estimated that over a seven-year period he provided his wife’s family approximately 
$200,000.4 Applicant stated that after he and his wife were married for about six months 
her personality changed and she became angry about nothing.5  
 
Applicant stated his wife would return to the Philippines with her sister for months 
at a time to visit her family. He would visit periodically. He estimated that in the seven 
1 I have received letters that contain briefs and attached exhibits from Applicant’s counsel dated 
February 6, 2009, September 18, 2008 and June 18, 2008. I have considered all of these documents. 
 
2 Tr. 28-38. 
 
3 Tr. 75-81, 87, 89. 
 
4 AE B consists of two money orders, the amounts on them are illegible. 
 
5 Tr. 81-89, 112-113. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
years they were married she spent about half of the time in the Philippines with her 
family.6 
 
In 1998 Applicant and his wife had a daughter. His wife gave birth in the 
Philippines. He was present at the birth, but returned to his job in the Korea shortly 
thereafter and she remained in the Philippines for three months with their newborn 
baby. When she returned back to Korea he continued to work long hours. He estimated 
he only saw the baby about 30 minutes in the evening when he came home from work. 
He spent time with her watching television, playing games, going to church and going to 
the base.7  
 
Applicant testified that after the baby was born his relationship with his wife 
changed. He stated she wanted more money, so he gave her more money. He testified 
she had access to his accounts. He paid all of the bills and gave her spending money. 
She did not like to write checks or use the ATM so he gave her cash. The money he 
gave her was in addition to the money he stated he provided for her family. He 
purchased all of the “big ticket” items they needed. He stated, “I purchased all of the 
food.” He believed their main “issue” was financial. She would complain that he was not 
providing enough support for her family. He stated “I would give her money, but it wasn’t 
enough.” He stated “I would work too late, she would call my boss and she’d say ‘well, 
you know, when is he coming home.”8 He stated she would hit him, be violent towards 
him, and leave scratch marks on his face.9  
 
Applicant testified he and his family went to the Philippines in 2000 to visit her 
family. He stayed for two to three weeks. They also visited Applicant’s family in the U.S. 
with their daughter when she was two.  
 
In December 2002, Applicant, his wife and their daughter traveled to the U.S. to 
visit his parents. He stated his wife insisted they rent a car, even though his parents had 
vehicles, so she could travel to [State B]. He and his wife went to a local resort for a 
week. They left their daughter with her grandparents before returning to his family’s 
residence. While at the resort Applicant stated they were approached about purchasing 
a time share. He stated “we went there and we did and I actually ended up purchasing 
the time share.”10 He stated it was for him and his wife. Applicant provided the contract 
he signed on December 19, 2002. It lists only Applicant as the holder of property and 
not his wife as a joint owner.11 Applicant stated his wife was always on the phone with 
6 Tr. 87-88, 103. 
 
7 Tr. 90-95. 
 
8 Tr. 118. 
 
9 Tr. 96-100, 118. 
 
10 Tr. 116. 
 
11 AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
her sister. He stated his daughter was happy spending time with her grandparents. 
Applicant testified that he thought his wife was concerned about his daughter spending 
too much time with her grandparents. On December 29, 2002, Applicant’s wife would 
not let his mother take their daughter to church. When he came home from church he 
found his wife had packed their belongings and wanted to go to a hotel. Applicant 
obliged. He stated his wife was angry with him and had a violent demeanor.12 
 
Applicant checked his family into a hotel on the night of December 29, 2002, but 
he returned to his parents’ residence. He denies he locked his wife in the room or 
prevented her from making phone calls, or restricted her freedom in anyway. He 
returned to the hotel the next morning, December 30, 2002, and brought them 
breakfast. He stated his wife was upset with him and told him “they were not 
compatible”. She wanted money so he gave her about $20 and told her he would go to 
the bank. He left to go to the bank and stated he said “I love you, [daughter].” He 
returned 30-40 minutes later and his wife and daughter were gone. The person at the 
hotel front desk told him they had checked out and he had Applicant’s possessions. 
Applicant paid the hotel bill and returned to his parents.13 
 
Applicant testified that the first thing he did when he returned to his parents’ 
residence was to contact the police department.14 He was advised because it was less 
than 24 hours he could not file a missing persons report. He testified that he received a 
call from the police sometime later while at his parents that the police had received an 
anonymous call explaining his wife and daughter were safe.15 Applicant stated “I had no 
clue where they were.”16 He left the next day, December 31, 2002, to return to Korea. 
He had been on leave for 30 days and was required to report back to work.17  
 
In January 2003, weeks after he stated his wife and daughter left and he had no 
idea where they were, he filed an abandonment petition, the first step in the process to 
file for divorce, in the state where his parents resided. He hired an attorney from the 
state who advised him that he had to be separated from his wife for a year before they 
could divorce. Applicant stated the divorce was uncontested and became final on April 
28, 2004. The notice of divorce was completed by publication. Applicant testified “I am 
not a person that wants divorce. I did not want a divorce.” He went on to say “I don’t 
12 Tr. 114-123. 
 
13 Tr. 123-127. 
 
14 Tr. 127. 
 
15 Applicant’s testimony is somewhat inconsistent with his sworn statement (GE 5) of December 
11, 2007. In the statement he indicated that he returned to Korea not knowing of his family’s location. 
Upon his return he had a phone message from his brother-in-law advising him that his wife and daughter 
were “okay.” 
 
16 Tr. 127. 
 
17 Tr. 128-129. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
believe in divorce. I was devastated that I had to do that. That I was forced into a 
divorce because she abandoned me.”18  
 
Applicant’s provided a sworn statement in December 2007. He stated the 
following:  
 
There was never any contact between myself, wife or daughter. There 
was never any child custody hearing or any discussion or settlement on 
financial matters. I was never obligated by the court to pay spousal or 
child support nor was it ever demanded from me by my ex-wife. To my 
knowledge a child support complaint was never filed against me. After we 
separated, I never paid spousal support or child support, primarily 
because I have not since December 2002 heard or seen my ex-wife or 
daughter and have no knowledge as to where they currently reside.19 
 
*** 
 
About a week after I filed for divorce in January [20]03, I was informed by 
the Legal Office/JAG at [base] that my ex-wife had made allegations 
against me of sexual assault, molestation and rape. I later understood that 
the [base] investigated these allegations. However, I was never arrested 
or criminally charged as a result of these allegations.  
 
                                                         *** 
 
I believe that [my brother-in-law] had coordinated and orchestrated these 
allegations against me by way of military channels, which is the reason 
[the base] became involved. [My brother-in-law] was not only my ex-wife’s 
brother-in-law, but he was a former work associate and friend.  
 
                                                         *** 
 
The last time I spoke to [brother-in-law] was by way of telephone in 
Nov[ember] [20]02 and the conversation was pleasant. [My brother-in-law] 
never inferred to me or accused me directly of inappropriately touching or 
instructing his son of anything of a sexual nature, or having raped his 
sister-in-law or having molested my daughter. I am not sure why [brother-
in-law] became involved in this matter other than having thought or 
believed that he was assisting his wife and sister-in-law of doing the right 
thing. I need to emphasize that the investigation pertaining to these 
allegations at some point stopped, especially after [brother-in-law] was 
supposed to have passed away in a hotel room in the Philippines in Jul[y] 
[20]03 due to a heart attack. However, I believe for whatever reason, that 
18 Tr. 135-138, 152-156, 202-207. 
 
19 GE 5 page 6. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
[brother-in-law] may have staged his own death. I understand that 
[brother-in-law] had accumulated a great deal of debt and was 
experiencing financial problems. I think it’s possible that [brother-in-law] is 
still alive, living in the Philippines, but it’s strictly speculation on my part. 
 
                                                       *** 
 
Regarding my daughter, about the time she had turned three years old, I 
had suspicions about whether I was her biological father. I had suggested 
to my ex-wife about taking a paternity test but my ex-wife would not permit 
it. I felt that my ex-wife acted in such a way to lead me to think that [child] 
was not my daughter. She made me feel that she did not want me to be 
involved in our daughter’s life.20 
 
Applicant testified that the JAG office notified him of the molestation charges and 
advised him he had to appear in court in February 2002 in State A. Applicant stated he 
hired a lawyer in that state to represent him. He never personally appeared. He stated 
the charges were dropped and nothing became of that particular proceeding. Applicant 
later testified that these matters have never been addressed in a criminal court.21  
 
On January 11, 2003, Applicant’s wife reported to a mental health professional in 
State A for treatment. Her daughter disclosed that Applicant had spanked her 
repeatedly on numerous occasions and had demanded that she take her pants down 
whenever she was going to receive a spanking. This was confirmed by her mother. 
Applicant’s wife provided a photograph of one of the more severe beatings endured by 
her daughter. Based on this information a report was made to the state’s abuse hotline. 
A child protective investigator and sheriff went to the wife’s home and interviewed the 
child alone. The child disclosed her father had also been sexually inappropriate with her 
on numerous occasions.22 
 
The child attended sexual abuse therapy that also addressed the issues 
concerning the physical violence. The child disclosed during the sessions that her father 
did more than physically abuse her he also would touch her inappropriately with her 
pants down. During each session the child would refer to her father as “mean or angry.” 
It was determined by the mental health professional that the child had been physically 
and sexually abused.23 
 
20 Tr. 131-148; GE 5. 
 
21 Tr. 133-134, 171. 
 
22 GE 2 exhibit 13. The specifics of the nature and extent of the inappropriate sexual contact and 
behavior are included in this report. It is unnecessary to describe in detail the sexual conduct, other than 
to find the conduct was inappropriate and would constitute physical and sexual assaults and indecent 
acts with a child.  
 
23 Id. 
 
7 
 
 
 A report from the [State] Protective Services System noted where Applicant’s 
wife was living and that she is “terrified of the father” and “the father is not aware of the 
mother’s current location.” It noted that Applicant’s wife alleged she was being 
physically abused. Applicant’s wife made a sworn statement on May 19, 2003, which 
alleged Applicant physically and sexually abused her. She stated: 
 
Since we have been married, [Applicant] had always been very controlling 
over our finances and day to day routines. I could not buy anything or do 
anything without his approval. Not very often and I can not tell you the 
exact dates, but occasionally, [Applicant] would twist my arm behind my 
back , push me against the wall or on the [couch], and on one specific 
time, about year 2000, he hit me on my back with his fist. During this same 
incident, he choked me and pushed me on the [couch]. He was very angry 
and he never told me why he assaulted me and the reason why. I told 
[Applicant] that I wanted to call my sister [MM], who also lived in Korea, 
and ask for help. [Applicant] unplugged the phone and refused to allow me 
to talk with anyone. I never received any medical treatment because I did 
not know how to contact the U.S. authorities on the military reservations. 
The night that [Applicant] was choking me and hit me on the back, my 
sister had come to our house and she can witnessed that I had marks on 
my neck. My sister asked if I had notified the Military Police and I stated 
that I could not leave the house because he was prevented me from 
leaving and he had unplugged the telephone denying me to make 
telephone calls. [Applicant] got down on his knees and begged my sister 
to not notify the authorities because he stated he did harm me. My sister 
stated she could see his hand impressions on my neck and he could not 
deny that he had hurt me. He continued to beg my sister and she sat 
down and talked with [Applicant] about the abuse. My sister never 
reported the incident to authorities. That night I slept in my daughter’s 
bedroom to allow [Applicant] to cool off. I then begin to sleep with 
[Applicant] the following day.  
 
From that day when he choked me, [Applicant] would mentally abuse my 
daughter and me. For example, when my daughter and I wanted 
something, [Applicant] would intentionally not buy the item. I had no 
access to the bank account or funds, and he was always the approving 
authority for anything. Another example would be that [Applicant] would be 
allowed to eat steak at dinner and my daughter and I would only be 
allowed to eat rice. [Applicant] would also never allow me to have friends 
that had an income from employment. I was only allowed to have 
acquaintances that were home moms only. I was also never allowed to get 
a driver’s license or drive, I was not permitted by [Applicant]. More 
importantly, I was not allowed to work.  
 
[Applicant] started physically abusing my daughter [name], when she was 
about 2 1/2 or 3 years of age until he abandoned us in December [2000]. 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
He would pull her hair, choke her, and hit her with an open hand reason 
for unknown. He left marks and bruises on my daughter, but he refused 
her medical attention. All the physical abuse of my daughter and I were at 
our only residence in Korea.  
 
About 5 Dec 03, [Applicant] told me that if I did not accompany him to the 
U.S. that I would never see my parents again nor see my daughter. My 
daughter and I went to [State C] with [Applicant] to visit his family. About 
29 Dec 02, we were staying at the [hotel], [Applicant] looked at me and 
stated we are no longer compatible and abandoned my daughter and I at 
the hotel with no money and no access to money. He also coordinated 
with the hotel and ensured that I could not make any outside telephone 
calls. I had no money for food for my daughter. I was so scared and I 
didn’t know what to do. I went to a local telephone booth and called a 
friend for help who lived in State B. She called my sister in Korea and my 
sister then called me at the front desk at the hotel. My sister paid the bill at 
the hotel and also sent me some money for food. My sister then called my 
niece in [State A] and she drove to [State C] and brought my daughter and 
I to [State A].  
 
Since I arrived to [State A] I have been severely depressed and my 
niece’s husband contacted his insurance company who referred me for 
treatment to Mrs. G. I started receiving therapy from Mrs. G and disclosed 
that my daughter was being physically abused by [Applicant]. My daughter 
was then evaluated by Mrs. G and disclosed that she was physically and 
sexually abused by [Applicant]. I had no knowledge or did not notice any 
sign[s] was being sexually abused by [Applicant]. I have no details of the 
sexual abuse as my daughter disclosed this abuse to Mrs. G. I then 
disclosed that I had been sexually assaulted by [Applicant] at our home in 
Korea from an unknown date in 1999 until we were abandoned in [State 
C].24 
 
Applicant’s wife then explained she was raped by her husband approximately six 
times. She told him no and he grabbed her and threw her on the bed, forcefully 
removed her clothes and then raped her. She never reported the rapes or physical 
abuse to law enforcement nor sought medical attention. She was scared for her 
daughter’s safety if she told anyone about any of the abuse. She alleged that it was 
Applicant who abandoned her and their daughter at the hotel and returned to his 
overseas job without notifying her.25  
 
24 GE 2 at exhibit 10.  
 
25 Id. 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
 A Sexual Assault Medical Report from the County Child Protection Team 
concluded the physical findings from their examination “neither support or refute 
allegations of sexual abuse.”26 
 
Applicant provided a paid invoice showing that he paid for the hotel from 
December 29 to December 30, 2002. He also provided a statement from his mother. His 
mother’s statement said that Applicant’s daughter told her that she was supposed to 
stay with her mother. She also said that her uncle (Applicant’s brother-in-law) told her 
the child to tell everyone that Applicant was a bad man and he mentioned the word 
“divorce” to her. Applicant’s mother confronted Applicant’s wife and she denied that her 
brother-in-law said anything and that the child was manipulating her grandmother. 
Applicant’s daughter is the only grandchild of his parents. The remainder of the 
statement was consistent with Applicant’s story. Applicant denies he physically or 
sexually assaulted his wife and daughter. 
 
In March 2003, Applicant’s wife filed for sole custody of their daughter in State F, 
alleging Applicant abandoned them and physically and sexually abused their daughter 
and physically abused her. Applicant’s wife is not a U.S. citizen, but has a green card.27 
Applicant testified the petition was denied. No supporting documentation was provided 
to substantiate the ruling. When asked why he did not appear in court to gain access to 
his daughter, he stated he could not get off from work. He stated he was not granted 
custody of his daughter. When asked who was granted custody, he stated “I have no 
clue, sir.” He has not filed an appeal in any court for custody of his child. Applicant 
stated he last contacted his attorney regarding the petition from his wife in State A in 
2003. He stated he wanted to see his daughter, but does not know where she is. When 
asked why he did not go back to the same Court in State A, he stated “I haven’t had the 
opportunity to go there.”28  
 
Some of Applicant’s testimony was troubling. Applicant has not seen his ex-wife 
or daughter since December 30, 2002. He has not taken any action to visit or obtain 
custody of his daughter. He stated he does not know where his ex-wife and child are 
living. He hired a private investigator in May 2003 to look for his wife and child. The 
documents he provided reflect some type of surveillance was conducted by a private 
investigator. The case was opened on May 13, 2003, and no other entries were noted 
after June 3, 2003. He admitted he has done nothing else to find his ex-wife and 
daughter. All of his court proceedings have been through an attorney. Applicant did not 
appear in court for his divorce or for the custody petition. He stated he could not take 
time off from work to confront the issues against him in person.29 
 
26 GE 2 at exhibit 11. 
 
27 AE C. 
 
28 Tr. 149-151.172-175, 234-236. 
 
29 Tr. 194 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant testified he misses his daughter but does not know where she is 
located. However, he also admitted he has not looked for her at all. He has not 
contacted his wife’s attorney, or contacted her sister or made any other inquires. 
Applicant’s ex-wife has never requested or petitioned for spousal support or child 
support. She filed for divorce in 2008, unaware that Applicant’s previous divorce petition 
was granted in 2004. When asked why he did not go through the state where she filed 
for divorce to attempt to find his child he stated: “I have not had the opportunity.” He 
admitted that his ex-wife’s divorce petition did not request spousal support, child 
support, or a division of property. When asked if he had saved any money for child 
support, Applicant stated he had saved $100,000 for his daughter’s support and if he 
could find her he would give it to her. He went on to say “I am saddened by the fact that 
I cannot spend any time with her and be with her.”30 He later stated that he had called 
the phone number on the divorce papers from his ex-wife.31 I did not find Applicant’s 
statements credible. 
 
Applicant admitted he spanked his daughter, but not on her bare buttocks. He 
stated he worked very long hours, between 10 and 12 hours a day, six and seven days 
a week. Applicant stated he never was alone with his daughter during her entire life. He 
stated he never changed one of her diapers. He stated he and his wife potty trained 
their daughter, but he was never alone with her.32  
 
Applicant was investigated and questioned by military authorities in Korea, 
beginning in 2003. He denied he abused his wife and daughter. He refused to take a 
polygraph on the advice of his lawyer. Applicant was never charged with a criminal 
offense.33  
 
At his hearing Applicant suggested an explanation for his daughter’s allegations. 
He was made aware by his brother-in-law sometime between 2000 and 2002, when 
Applicant’s daughter was visiting with her mother’s relatives in the Philippines, that there 
was a domestic worker who had a brother in the area. Applicant learned that this 
brother had molested an eight-year-old female relative of his wife’s family. Applicant 
could not clearly remember when he was told about this person nor could he remember 
when the alleged abuse by this brother took place, but believed it was around 2000 
when he learned of it. Applicant stated “it is very possible that this boy did the 
molesting” of his daughter. Applicant admitted he never mentioned this “potential 
suspect” to any of the investigators during the course of the investigation. He stated 
30 Tr. 244. 
 
31 Tr. 160, 196, 242. 
 
32 Tr. 134-135, 156. 
 
33 Tr. 43-71. There are many reasons why some cases are not criminally prosecuted. In this case 
I do not have any statement or document as to why these alleged offenses were not pursued. The Korean 
authorities declined to prosecute. At the time of the allegations, the wife and child were no longer living in 
Korea. There are likely concerns about difficult international jurisdictional issues and the potential 
additional trauma to an alleged child victim.  
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
“that’s something I left out.”34 It is unclear how Applicant’s daughter, at the age of two 
would confuse this boy with her father or could articulate how she was molested. This 
was the first time Applicant mentioned this “potential suspect.” I did not find Applicant’s 
theory credible.35 
 
Applicant believes his wife’s motivation for making these accusations is because 
she told him she would ruin his life if he did not do everything she wanted and this is a 
way to ruin him. This appears inconsistent with Applicant’s “potential suspect” theory.36 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. He stated Applicant’s wife would 
call where they worked, sometimes multiple times during a day. He observed Applicant 
had scratches on his face. He did not socialize with Applicant. He stated Applicant 
discussed that his wife was always demanding money and spending it on her extended 
family. The witness stated “no other man was more devoted to his family, but he had to 
provide the highest standard of living.” He confirmed that he would have approved 
Applicant’s leave request to go look for his daughter. Such a request was never made.37  
 
 Applicant met a woman over the internet from the Philippines in approximately 
April 2005. She is now his girlfriend. He visits her over long weekends when possible. 
They speak on the phone or text message daily. He has been sending her 
approximately $150 a month since January 2006. When visiting her in the Philippines 
they meet at a hotel. He does not know her home address because she has moved. He 
does not pay for her living arrangements. He is aware that she has two brothers and a 
sister, but has never been introduced to them and he does not know how they are 
employed. She is employed as a seamstress at a factory. He previously had planned to 
marry her, but has since changed his mind and is not sure. He last visited her for a 
week over the holidays in December 2008. She is aware that Applicant works in Korea, 
but does not know the nature of his job. Applicant stated that if his girlfriend made 
inquires about his job he would leave her.38 
 
 I have considered all of the testimony and all of the documentary evidence from 
both parties, including the character letters provided.  
 
Philippines 
 
 The Philippines has a representative democracy modeled on the U.S. System. 
The 1987 constitution reestablished a presidential system of government with a 
bicameral legislature and an independent judiciary. The government continues to face 
34 Tr. 167. 
 
35 Tr. 105-111, 157-158, 165-168, 222. 
 
36 Tr. 241. 
 
37 Tr. 269-308. 
 
38 Tr. 180 188, 190-192, 241. 
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
threats from terrorist groups. The terrorist groups have gained international notoriety 
with their kidnapping of foreign tourists in the southern islands. This remains a major 
problem of the government. U.S. troops advise, assist and train Philippine soldiers in 
counterterrorism. In 2006, the armed forces of the Philippines began a major offensive 
against these terrorist groups which was remarkably successful.  
 
 “The U.S. and Philippine relations are based on shared history and commitment 
to democratic principles, as well as on economic ties. The historical and cultural links 
between the Philippines and the U.S. remain strong. The Philippines modeled its 
government institutions on those of the U.S. and continues to share a commitment to 
democracy and human rights. At the most fundamental level of bilateral relations, 
human links continue to form a strong bridge between the two countries. There are an 
estimated four million Americans of Philippine ancestry in the United States, and more 
than 250,000 American citizens in the Philippines.”39  
 
 Since 1992, U.S. and Philippine relations have improved and broadened, with a 
prominent focus on economic and commercial ties while maintaining the importance of 
the security dimension. U.S. investment continues to play an important role in the 
Philippine economy, with a strong security relationship.40  
 
 “Nearly 400,000 Americans visit the Philippines each year. Providing government 
services to U.S. and other citizens, therefore, constitutes an important aspect of the 
bilateral relationship. Those services include veterans’ affairs, social security, and 
consular operations. Benefits to Filipinos from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
and the Social Security Administration totaled approximately $330 million dollars in 
2007. Many people-to-people programs exist between the U.S. and the Philippines, 
including Fulbright, International Visitors, and Aquino Fellowship exchange programs, 
as well as the U.S. Peace Corps.”41 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
39 HE I through VI. 
 
40 Id. 
 
41 U.S. State Department Background Note: Philippines, October 2008. 
 
 
13 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior:  
 
Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information.  
 
14 
 
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶13 that could raise a 
security concern including the following: 
 
 (a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
 (b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
There is evidence to support that Applicant’s ex-wife and daughter were 
physically and sexually abused by Applicant. A child protective investigator interviewed 
Applicant’s daughter alone and she disclosed her father had been sexually 
inappropriate with her on numerous occasions. It was also disclosed that he had 
spanked her on her bare buttocks. A mental health professional employed by State A 
concluded Applicant’s child had been physically and sexually abused. I find all of the 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14 to include the 
following: 
 
 (a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress, and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 Many of Applicant’s explanations and theories I did not find credible. Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion and he failed to provide persuasive evidence to 
conclude any of the above mitigating conditions apply. There is documentary evidence 
based on interviews with the child and sworn statements from Applicant’s ex-wife that 
substantiate physical and sexual abuse were perpetrated on them by Applicant. His 
theory about a “potential suspect” was not raised until his hearing which raises 
 
15 
 
 
questions about his credibility. There clearly are discrepancies between Applicant’s 
story and his ex-wife’s. Applicant claimed his ex-wife always wanted more money and 
was never satisfied. He believed his ex-wife was out to ruin him. Beyond her initial 
complaint to state authorities there is no other evidence she pursued these allegations 
against him through the legal system to ruin him. If she was dissatisfied with their 
financial situation and always wanted more money as alleged by Applicant, it is unclear 
why she did not pursue any spousal and child support. This is inconsistent with 
Applicant’s theory she wanted more money and was attempting to ruin him. Applicant 
admittedly has not pursued any type of visitation with his daughter. He has made a 
nominal effort to find them. He began the divorce process weeks after he stated they 
abandoned him and he had no idea where they were located.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern regarding criminal conduct: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
to willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
 (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant physically and sexually 
assaulted his wife and daughter. The specific information is the same as was discussed 
under Guideline D, Sexual Behavior. I find disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that may mitigate the security concerns. I have 
considered them all and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) so much time has elapses since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are not longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 
16 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. The 
discussion addressed under Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, is applicable under the 
Criminal Conduct allegations. I conclude there is sufficient evidence to find Applicant 
committed the offenses alleged and he failed to meet his burden of persuasion in 
mitigation.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
Applicant has a girlfriend in the Philippines. He has regular contact with her. She 
is a factory worker. He visits her during vacations and long weekends when he can. His 
contact with her does not create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. There is a strong U.S. presence in the Philippines. 
Although there are terrorist threats in the Philippines, the U.S. has long been an ally. 
Applicant’s relationship with his girlfriend does not create a potential conflict of interest 
 
17 
 
 
between his obligation to protect sensitive information and his desire to help his 
girlfriend. I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions and conclude none apply.  
In an abundance of caution, I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered 
all of the mitigating conditions for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially 
considered the following: 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
 Applicant has a girlfriend in the Philippines. He visits her when he has the time. 
She is a factory worker. The U.S. and the Philippines are allies and have had strong 
international ties for decades. Applicant has worked as a U.S. contractor overseas since 
1993. His relationship with his girlfriend is more than casual, but there is nothing to 
suggest that Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between his 
girlfriend and the interests of the U.S. This is equally true for any conflict of interest that 
may arise. Applicant’s sense of loyalty and obligation would clearly outweigh any 
conflict and he would clearly be expected to resolve such in favor of the U.S. I find 
under the facts of this case, if a disqualifying condition did apply it would be mitigated 
under both (a) and (b). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
18 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has worked for a defense 
contractor overseas for many years. He has a good work record. The allegations of 
sexual and physical abuse to both his ex-wife and daughter are substantiated by the 
documentary evidence. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion to refute the 
allegations. The allegations are of a serious nature. The nature of the allegations clearly 
could create the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, and duress. Applicant’s 
theories did not rise to the level of refuting the allegations. I found much of his testimony 
not credible or believable. I have considered all of the evidence for both sides and 
conclude Applicant did not meet his heavy burden.  
 
With regard to the allegations under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, I considered 
Applicant’s relationship with his girlfriend in the Philippines and the United State’s 
relationship with the Philippines. There is nothing to lead me to believe that Applicant 
would resolve any conflict of interest in any way other than for the U.S. The mere fact 
that he has a girlfriend in the Philippines does not create a heightened risk for foreign 
exploitation, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the sexual 
behavior and criminal conduct guidelines. Applicant has met his burden regarding the 
security concerns arising under the foreign influence guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph  2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  
 
 
19 
 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
