 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 06-26489 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  John F. Fusco, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the 
Handling Protected Information, Personal Conduct, and Foreign Influence adjudicative 
guidelines.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 1, 2005, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-Qip). On May 22, 2008, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline K, Handling Protected Information, 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was not dated. He requested a hearing before a 
DOHA administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 16, 2008. With 
the consent of the parties, I scheduled hearings for January 28, 2009 and February 6, 
2009. The hearing was continued on those dates for inclement weather and the 
unavailability of a government witness. I reconvened the hearing on February 20, 2009.  
At that time, Applicant introduced five exhibits (Ex.), which were marked as Applicant’s 
Ex. A through E and admitted to the record without objection. At the February 20, 2009, 
hearing, the parties agreed to another continuance to enable a witness, previously ill 
and unavailable, to testify for the government.  
 
On March 4, 2009, I reconvened the hearing to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called one witness, introduced twelve exhibits (Ex. 1 
through 12), and offered facts found in eight official documents of the U.S. Government 
for administrative notice. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.)  The Government’s exhibits were 
admitted without objection. I took notice of HE 1.  Applicant testified on this own behalf 
and called two witnesses. He introduced two additional exhibits, which were marked as 
Ex. F and G and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr. 1) of the February 20, 2009 hearing on March 2, 2009. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr. 2) of the March 4, 2009 hearing on March 13, 2009.    
                                          
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under AG K, Handling 
Protected Information (SOR ¶ 1.a.), two allegations of disqualifying information under 
AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.), and five AG allegations under AG B, 
Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 3.a. through 3.e.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the Guideline K and E allegations but denied they were disqualifying conduct 
under the guidelines. He admitted the five Guideline B allegations. In response to all 
allegations, he provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as 
findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and a Ph.D. electrical engineer. He is employed as a 
principal investigator, researcher, and program manager by a government contractor. 
He holds several patents. Applicant’s employer considers his contribution to his field to 
be unique and of  high importance internationally.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 2, 99-102, 115.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States and received his undergraduate and 
graduate degrees from U.S. institutions. He earned his Ph.D. in 1997. He has been 
employed by his current employer or its predecessor since 1997. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 Applicant was first granted special access security clearance eligibility by his 
employer in about 2000. During the time he held the special access eligibility, between 
2000 and 2004, he complied with the foreign contact reporting requirement and reported 
his relationship with some of his foreign contacts from Asia. Applicant maintained 
special access eligibility until he transferred to another sector of the company in 2004.  
He was read-out of the special access program before he transferred to the new sector. 
When he assumed his duties at the new sector in November 2004, he was awarded a 
secret level security clearance. In about February 2005, he prepared the forms 
necessary to be inducted into the new sector’s special access program. In April of 2005, 
after a security indoctrination briefing, he was again granted eligibility for special 
access.  (Tr. 2 at  38-41, 115-118, 137-140.) 
 
 In the briefing he received in April 2005 at the time he was awarded eligibility for 
special access, Applicant’s employer provided him with a document entitled “Security 
Education and Awareness Training.” In that document, employees holding special 
access eligibility were advised to report changes in marital status, to inform the 
employer of cohabitation, particularly if the partner was a foreign national, and to 
request clearance for travel to hazardous countries. The training document stated: 
“SCI/SAP [Special Access Program] cleared individuals must report all close and 
continuing relationships with foreign nationals.” Applicant raised no questions or 
concerns at the briefing. (Ex. 2; Tr. 2 at 37-41 .) 
 
 In 1995, while he was a graduate student, Applicant married a U.S. citizen, who 
earned a Ph.D. in Physics. Two daughters were born to the marriage. The children are 
now ages nine and six. Applicant’s wife worked in the same area of specialization as he 
did. She was employed by the same employer as Applicant, and she and Applicant 
worked in the same building. She also holds a security clearance.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 2, 177-
179.) 
 
 In 1996, while still in graduate school, Applicant met a woman, a citizen of 
Russia, who was also pursuing graduate studies in his area of specialty. Later, he saw 
the woman at work sessions at his company and at professional meetings. The Russian 
woman, hereafter identified as “Z,” was employed as a professor at a university in 
Sweden. She was married to a Russian citizen, and she resided in Sweden with her 
husband and their two children.  (Ex. 3; Ex. 4; Ex. 7; Ex. 9.) 
 
 In February 2005, Applicant and Z attended a professional conference and 
began a romantic relationship. He traveled to Sweden to visit Z in March, October, and 
November 2005. He did not tell his wife of the affair until sometime in September 2005. 
He did not inform his security officer of the relationship or of his three personal trips to 
visit Z in Sweden until November 2005. Applicant’s employer suspended his security 
clearance in November 2005. When he completed his e-QIP in December 2005, 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant listed Z as his associate and stated he planned to begin living with her in a 
spouse-like relationship in early 2006. He claimed he did not comply with security 
requirements for reporting the relationship or his foreign travel to visit Z because he was 
confused about special access program reporting requirements. Applicant’s claims of 
confusion were not credible.  (Ex. 1; Ex. 3; Ex. 4; Ex. 6; Tr. 2 at 41-44.)    
 
 At some time during their relationship, Applicant told Z that he had access to 
classified information. In January or February 2006, Applicant moved out of the home 
he shared with his wife and began cohabiting with Z, who had left her husband and 
moved to the United States with her two children. Z and her husband divorced.  
Applicant and his wife were divorced on March 20, 2007. Applicant and Z were married 
on March 26, 2007.  (Ex. 8; Ex. 9; Tr. 2 at 127.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant denied he could be coerced or 
blackmailed because of his relationship with Z. He reported, however, that the 
relationship upset his parents, and they “tried to organize a family-wide boycott of me 
and mine.”  He also reported that two colleagues had commented on the relationship, 
advised him to end it, and suggested that it could have social consequences for him at 
his work. Applicant stated: “These efforts, while memorable, have left me totally 
unconvinced.”  (Ex. 10 at 3-4.) 
     
 Z, Applicant’s second wife, is a citizen of Russia and Sweden and resides with 
him in the United States. She received her academic training at a university in Russia 
and remains in contact with at least one of her former professors there. Her former 
husband, a dual citizen of Russia and Sweden, is also a graduate of a Russian 
university and holds a Ph.D. in Physics.  He lives and works in Russia.  (Ex. 3; Ex. 4; 
Ex. 7; Ex. 11; Tr. 2 at 133.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife share their home with his wife’s two daughters, aged 11 
and 19, who are citizens of Russia and Sweden. Applicant’s step-daughters visit their 
father in Russia during the summer and during Christmas holidays. The younger step-
daughter spends approximately eight weeks with her father in Russia each summer, 
and she has weekly telephone contact with her father. The older step-daughter, who is 
a college student in the United States, visits her father but spends less time in Russia. 
(Tr. 2 at 132-133.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are residents and citizens of Russia. 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law retired in the mid-1990s. Both were 
employed by the Russian government and receive government pensions. Applicant’s 
father-in-law was the head of a government department that imported electronics. 
Applicant’s wife is close to her parents: she speaks with them by telephone once a 
week, and she sends them $300 a month for their support.  (Ex. 11; Tr. 2 at 133-134.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister-in-law is his wife’s half-sister. She is also a citizen and resident 
of Russia. Applicant’s wife has contact with her sister approximately every six months.  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant thinks his sister-in-law lost her job.  He thinks she might be unemployed.  He 
does not know his sister-in-law’s occupation.  (Answer to SOR; Tr. 2 at 135-136.)   
  
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Russia which appear in 
official U.S. government publications: 
 
 Since at least 1997, Russia has targeted U.S. technologies and has sought to 
obtain protected information through industrial espionage. Russia’s Directorate of the 
General Staff (GRU) provides intelligence to Russia’s military. The GRU carries out 
specialized technical collection activities that threaten U.S. interests.  Additionally, a 
KGB-successor organization, the Federal Security Service (FSB), operates outside 
Russia by targeting national security and environmental researchers.  Russia also 
operates a signal intelligence facility in Cuba that targets the United States.  (HE 1: 
Summary at 1-3.)  
 
 In addition to its technology collection and espionage activities against the U.S., 
Russia supports missile programs and nuclear and biotechnology projects in other 
countries. These technologies can be used in the construction of weapons of mass 
destruction. Despite U.S. concerns, Russia has refused to cease constructing nuclear 
reactors in Iran. (HE 1: Summary at 3-4.) 
 
 Russia’s internal problems include terrorism and a poor human rights record.  
The U.S. Department of State has warned U.S. citizens of safety concerns related to 
travel in Russia.  (HE 1: Summary at 4.) 
 
 The U.S. Department of State reports allegations that Russian government 
officials and others conduct electronic surveillance without judicial permission.  This 
surveillance includes FSB monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic.  Additionally, Russian 
law enforcement agencies have legal access to the personal information of users of 
telephone and cell phone services.  (HE 1: Summary at 6-7.) 
 
 The U.S. Department of State advises U.S. citizens who are former Russian 
citizens that, when they travel to Russia, they may be considered to be Russian citizens 
and not allowed to leave Russia unless they present a Russian passport.  (HE 1: 
Summary at 7.)    
 
        Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
 
6 
 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 describes the Guideline K security concern as follows: “Deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other 
sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, 
reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such information. . . .” 
 
 
7 
 
 
 In 2005, when he transferred sectors in his company, Applicant was granted a 
security clearance and eligibility for a special access program.  He was indoctrinated 
into the special access program and provided with training and information on the rules 
he was to follow in protecting classified or other sensitive information. He was 
specifically instructed that as an individual cleared for a Special Access Program, he 
must report “all close and continuing relationships with foreign nationals.” At the time he 
received his training, Applicant was involved in an affair with a citizen of Russia. He 
chose not to follow the rules for protecting classified information and did not report the 
affair. This action raises security concerns under AG ¶ 34(g), which reads: “any failure 
to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive information.” 
 
 Several Guideline K mitigating conditions might be applicable to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. If “so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” 
then AG ¶ 35(a) might apply.  If “the individual responded favorably to counseling or 
remedial security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities,” then AG ¶ 35(b) might apply.  If “the security 
violations were due to improper or inadequate training,” then AG ¶ 25(c) might apply. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified 
and other sensitive information occurred in April 2005, and is not therefore recent.  
However, at his hearing, Applicant maintained that he was confused by the reporting 
requirement and, therefore, his failure to follow the instructions given to him should be 
excused. Applicant’s continuing refusal to acknowledge his responsibility to comply with 
a reporting requirement was intentional and has not been mitigated by the passage of 
time. He knew that he should report the relationship and deliberately chose not to do so. 
He failed to demonstrate a positive attitude toward the discharge of his security 
responsibilities. Nothing in the record suggests that his failure to protect classified or 
other sensitive information was caused by improper or inadequate training. Accordingly, 
I conclude that AG ¶¶ 35(a), 35(b), and 35(c) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 Applicant deliberately misled his employer and risked potential compromise of 
classified information when he did not report his close and continuing relationship with a 
foreign national, despite clear instructions from his security officer to do so. Under AG 
¶15 of the Personal Conduct guideline, “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.” Applicant’s poor judgment and unwillingness to comply with the rules raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(e)(1), and 16(f) of the Personal Conduct 
guideline. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) reads: “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person might not properly safeguard protected information.” AG ¶16(e)(1) 
reads, in pertinent part: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing.” AG ¶ 16(f) reads: “violation of a written or recorded commitment 
made by the individual to the employer as a condition of employment.” 
 
 Appellant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated if he “has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.”  AG ¶17(d).  Additionally, Appellant’s disqualifying conduct might be mitigated 
if he “has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.”  AG  ¶ 17(e). 
 
  Appellant failed to follow his employer’s rules for the protection of classified 
information. He was involved in an affair with a Russian citizen who knew he had 
access to classified information. He failed to disclose this information to his employer 
and to his wife, who also held a security clearance and was a co-worker. At his hearing 
he continued to excuse his lack of candor by stating that he was confused by the 
employer’s reporting requirements and therefore did not report the close and continuing 
relationship with a foreign national. Applicant’s defense of his failure to inform his 
employer lacked credibility. He is a well-educated, intelligent man, who was not 
confused by the security-reporting requirement. He failed to demonstrate that the 
disqualifying behavior was unlikely to recur. He also failed to demonstrate that he had 
reduced or eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
Accordingly, I conclude that neither AG ¶ 17(d) nor AG ¶ 17(e) applies to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
 
9 
 
 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(d). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(d) reads: 
“sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that 
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” 
 
 The United States is a primary intelligence target of Russia. American citizens 
with immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Russia could be 
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen of Russia and Sweden. His step-daughters are 
dual citizens of citizens of Russia and Sweden; they visit their Russian father in Russia 
regularly, and they have a close relationship with him. Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-
in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Russia. Now retired, Applicant’s 
father-in-law and mother-in-law worked for the Russian government and now receive 
pensions from that government. Applicant shares his home with his wife, who has close 
familial relationships with her parents, her two children, and her sister. Applicant’s wife 
speaks with her parents on the telephone frequently, and she sends her parents $300 
each month for their support.  These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(d). 
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
  
Applicant’s relationships with his wife and his wife’s relationships with her 
children, her parents, and her sister are neither casual nor infrequent. Instead, these 
relationships are based on long-standing family ties of affection and obligation. 
Applicant has an emotional bond of affection with his wife, a dual citizen of Russia and 
 
10 
 
 
Sweden, has strong familial obligations to her parents, her children, and her sister, all of 
whom are citizens of Russia. These close relationships raise a heightened risk that 
Applicant, who is recognized internationally for his work, could be targeted for 
exploitation, pressure, or coercion by the government of Russia in ways that might also 
threaten U.S. security interests.  
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen who was educated in the United States.  
He has an international reputation as a researcher in his area of specialty, which has 
national security implications. However, in 2005 he set aside his existing U.S. familial 
loyalties and chose a close personal relationship with a citizen of Russia, a country that 
aggressively targets U.S. national security and environmental researchers in order to 
collect U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic information. For several months, he did 
not reveal his relationship with the Russian citizen to his first wife or to his employer 
because he did not deem it in his interest to do so. It is not clear from the record that he 
has such long-standing relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that he could be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
Applicant failed to rebut the Government’s assertion that his contacts with his 
wife, a dual citizen of Russia and Sweden, his in-laws, who are citizens and residents of 
Russia, and his step-daughters, who are dual citizens of Russia and Sweden, created a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Applicant’s relationships with his family members who are citizens of Russia could force 
him to choose between loyalty to his relatives and the security interests of the United 
States.  (See ISCR Case No. 03-15485, at 4-6 (App. Bd. June 2, 2005).) I conclude that 
the mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) do not apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a mature adult of 39 years of age. While assigned by his employer to follow 
rules to protect classified information as a government contractor, Applicant became 
romantically involved with a Russian woman. He did not report this relationship to his 
employer, as he was required to do. He attempted to excuse his failure to report the 
relationship by stating that he was confused by the reporting rules, a statement that 
lacked credibility. At his hearing, Applicant continued to evade his responsibility for his 
failure to report the relationship, thereby continuing to raise security concerns and 
suggesting that he remained vulnerable to the possibility of coercion or duress.  
 
Applicant, a U.S. citizen, is a highly competent research scientist and an 
international leader in his field. By failing to disclose his affair with a Russian citizen, as 
required by his employer’s security rules, he exposed himself and his employer to the 
risk of possible exploitation and duress. He did not use good judgment in the choices he 
made. His conduct had the potential to seriously compromise the work he was assigned 
to carry out on behalf of the United States. He put his relationship with a Russian 
foreign national before U.S. security interests. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines K, 
E, and B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.e:   Against Applicant 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
