 W ithin the FORM was a Motion to Amend the SOR by, among other things, adding Guideline H. The1
motion is denied.
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-04145
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr.,  Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 6, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On July 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 29, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 29, 2008.  Applicant did not file a1
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 13, 2009. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant used marijuana “once every couple of months with friends” in 1995
(Exhibit 6).  He used cocaine once in November 2003. His cocaine use was discovered
during a random drug screening at his place of employment on the day following his
cocaine use.  His use of both drugs occurred while he was holding a security clearance
and/or a special access clearance. Both clearances were suspended following this
positive drug test.
In a signed, sworn statement he gave to an OPM/DOD investigator in October
2006 (Exhibit 5), applicant stated the following while discussing his cocaine use: “I had
never used any illegal drugs before and decided to try it,” and “I have never used any
illegal drug before this incident and I have not used any since.”  These statements were
false because, as noted above, he had used marijuana in 1995. In his response to the
SOR, applicant admitted that he deliberately failed to disclose his marijuana use when
he made these false statements.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
3
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.b., “deliberately providing false or misleading
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government representative” may be
disqualifying. This disqualifying condition is applicable because applicant deliberately
provided false material information to the OPM/DOD investigator.
Paragraph 17 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Under
Paragraph 17.a., it may be mitigating if “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the
facts.” The evidence establishes that applicant revealed his marijuana use to an
OPM/DOD investigator in December 2007, a little over a year after he concealed it from
a different OPM/DOD investigator. Even if it is assumed applicant voluntarily came
clean before being confronted with the facts, waiting over a year to do so hardly
constitutes a “prompt, good-faith effort” to correct the facts. Accordingly, this mitigating
condition is not applicable.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
4
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man with a
recent history of deliberately providing false material information to the Government. He
provided no evidence from independent sources (e.g., family, friends, coworkers,
neighbors) that would support a finding that this act of dishonesty was out of character
for him, or that he is likely to be truthful with the Government in the future. Without such
evidence, I have no choice but to conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns
arising from Guideline E.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
