                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-18453 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 1, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On July 9 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 6, 2008, and requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On January 28, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case.  A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on February 3, 2009.  
Applicant filed a response to the FORM on March 1, 2009, within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on March 3, 2009. 
 
I received the case assignment on March 16, 2009.  Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 9, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in all the subparagraphs of the SOR. He also provided additional information 
to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 55 years old, widowed in April 2006 from his second wife, and has 
no children.  He was divorced from his first wife.  He has worked for defense contractors 
for the past 27 years.  He has a degree in electrical engineering, and is about to finish a 
master’s degree in software engineering. (Items 3-6) 
 
 Applicant had a security clearance from October 1972 until July 1976 and from 
October 1980 until November 1990. The Government again granted Applicant a security 
clearance from April 1995 until the present. (Item 4, Question 26) 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a regular basis from September 1976 until early 
November 1989, and purchased it from 1976 to 1988.  Applicant received an 
unfavorable determination in August 1990 by a Directorate for Industrial Security 
Clearance Review (DISCR) Administrative Judge in a non-hearing case at the 
Applicant’s request, which decision was affirmed by the DISCR Appeal Board in 
November 1990, on this drug involvement issue.  The Administrative Judge in 1990 also 
found Applicant experimented with amphetamines, and occasionally purchased and 
used hashish.  Applicant’s answer of July 9, 2008 to the SOR admitted the marijuana 
use and purchases in the 1980s, selling marijuana, cultivating marijuana plants, using 
amphetamines until August 1981, and purchasing and using hashish until June 1980, 
though no starting dates were given. (Items 3 and 6) 
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana several times a week from February 2006 
until May 2007.  He admits using the marijuana to cope with his second wife’s cancer, 
and her death in April 2006.  Applicant admitted using marijuana while holding a 
security clearance in 1999.  He also admitted using marijuana after submitting his SF-86 
in February 2007 while holding a security clearance. (Items 3 and 4) 
 
  Applicant was also found in the 1990 decision to have falsified his security 
clearance application by failing to disclose his marijuana and other drug use during the 
1976 to 1980 time period, and his drug use while holding a secret security clearance.  
 
3 
 
 
He admitted this allegation again in his Answer of July 2008.  Applicant’s answer claims 
he passed two drug tests in 1990 and two tests in 1993, with negative results. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant answered his February 2007 SF-86 in “Section 24: Your Use of Illegal 
Drugs and Drug Activity” by admitting his illegal drug use in the past seven years, 
denying ever using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance, and denying illegally 
purchasing or receiving any narcotic, cannabis, or other illegal drug.  In fact, Applicant 
used marijuana while holding his most recent security clearance, and he received 
marijuana between February 2006 and May 2007 from his brother-in-law.  Applicant 
made an unsworn declaration in his interview on May 23, 2007 with a Government 
investigator that the marijuana “made him feel relaxed, hungry, tired and sleepy.”  
Applicant also told the investigator that he never used “any other illegal drugs.”  He also 
claimed he never “bought, sold, or cultivated marijuana” which was contrary to the 
findings of fact in the 1990 DISCR decision that he cultivated and sold marijuana up to 
two years before the decision, and his use of other drugs did occur, though some years 
earlier.  Applicant told the investigator in 2007 that he did not intend to use marijuana in 
the future because it was illegal. The 1990 decision cites Applicant’s statement in May 
1990 that he had resolved not to use marijuana in the future. (Items 4-6) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 (a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
 
 (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
 (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Applicant admits to using marijuana as recently as May 2007. AG ¶ 25 (a) 
applies.  He has illegally possessed marijuana at various times since 1976, even after 
receiving an unfavorable security clearance decision in 1990. AG ¶ 25 (c) applies.  
Applicant used marijuana while holding security clearances before 1990, as determined 
in the 1990 DISCR decision, and during his current security clearance from 1995 to the 
present. AG ¶ 25 (g) applies. Applicant declared in 1990 and again in 2007 that he 
would not use marijuana in the future. His repeated use after his earlier declaration 
makes his current statement unbelievable. He failed to “clearly and convincingly commit 
to discontinue drug use” based on his repeated conduct and assertions that marijuana 
helps him relax and cope with stress.  AG ¶ 25 (h) applies.   
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising under 
this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
 
6 
 
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
  Reviewing each of these mitigating conditions, it is clear that none apply.  
Applicant’s recent use and extensive history of past use cast doubt on his current 
reliability, and particularly his trustworthiness and good judgment.  After having an 
adverse decision made against him in 1990, and being a mature adult with a college 
degree, he disregarded the law and continued to use marijuana for his personal 
pleasure.  He has not demonstrated over the past 18 years that he will not abuse drugs 
in the future.  Particularly serious is Applicant’s repeated use of marijuana while holding 
a security clearance. The record evidence does not support the application of the the 
last two mitigating conditions, AG ¶ 26 (c) and (d),  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 15, the following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance 
action or administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
 (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
 (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
 (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
 
8 
 
 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
  
 Applicant was found in 1990 to have falsified his security clearance application 
by not disclosing his marijuana and other illegal drug use.  He failed again to disclose 
on his most recent security clearance application his use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance.  AG ¶ 16 (a) applies.  His repeated use of marijuana over many 
years makes him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because his 
activities might affect his personal, professional, or community standing.  AG ¶ 16 (e) 
applies.   
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
 
9 
 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  None of these mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation.  He has not 
made prompt and good-faith efforts to correct the omissions on his security clearance 
application, the SF-86.  There is no evidence he got bad advice from a lawyer or other 
authorized person to make his answers lack full disclosure. The repeated use of 
marijuana by an adult professional while holding a security clearance is not a minor 
offense.  Nor has Applicant obtained counseling for his long-term marijuana use.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a mature 55-year old 
professional electrical engineer.  He has a history of smoking marijuana since 1976.  He 
used amphetamines and hashish in the 1980s.  He purchased marijuana for his own 
use before 1990, and then again in 1999 and 2006 to 2007. He has not changed his 
behavior, nor acknowledged the wrongfulness of his conduct.  He regards marijuana as 
relaxing and sleep-inducing.  There is no rehabilitation shown, and it is likely his 
marijuana use will recur.  Applicant has shown a consistent lack of judgment and refusal 
to seek professional help with his multi-year history of illegal drug use. 
 
Furthermore, on two security clearance applications he falsified his answers by 
failing to deliberately disclose his continued use of marijuana while holding a security 
clearance both times.  Applicant is not credible in anything he stated in his Answer 
 
10 
 
 
about marijuana and his usage in the future. Because of his mendacious answers on 
two Government security clearance applications as he sought security clearances in the 
1990 and 2007, he is not to be believed on any of his assertions. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and personal conduct.  I also conclude the “whole person” concept against 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.b:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
