 
 
 
 
1
                                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No.  07-17879 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
On August 10, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
 
 
 
 
2
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated. In it he waived his right to a 
hearing. In accordance with Paragraph E3.1.7 of the Additional Procedural Guidance at 
Enclosure 3 of DoD Directive 5220.6, Department Counsel requested a hearing. 
(Hearing Exhibit 1).  DOHA assigned the case to me on December 8, 2008, and issued 
a Notice of Hearing on January 7, 2009. The case was heard on January 28, 2009, as 
scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibit (AE) A and B into evidence 
without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until February 
13, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On February 
11, 2009, Department Counsel forwarded to me three additional exhibits from Applicant 
marked as AE C through E. These were admitted into the record without objection from 
the Government. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 6, 2009.                                 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the 
SOR. (Tr. 13-14) Applicant did not object to the amendments. The Motion was granted 
and the SOR was amended as follows: 
 
1. ¶ 1.b: Delete the words “and 2(g) (regarding the charge of “FOID ID Cards”); 
 
2. ¶ 1.d: Delete the entire paragraph; 
 
3. ¶ 1.e: Delete the entire paragraph; 
 
4. ¶ 1.k: Delete the entire paragraph; 
 
5. ¶ 2.a: Delete the entire paragraph; 
 
6. ¶ 2.j: Delete the entire paragraph; 
 
7. ¶ 2.k: Delete the entire paragraph; and 
 
8. ¶ 2.l: Delete the entire paragraph.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following allegations contained in the SOR: ¶ 1.h; ¶ 1.i; ¶ 
1.j; ¶ 2.d; ¶ 2.e; ¶ 2.g; ¶ 2.h; ¶ 2.i; and ¶¶ 3.a through 3.d. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and single. He attended technical college for about a 
year and a half after high school. He has a plumbing license and has worked in the field 
for more than twenty-five years. In July 2007, he began working on the maintenance 
 
 
 
 
3
plumbing crew for his current employer, a defense contractor. He needs a security 
clearance in order to have access to areas that contain classified information.  
 
 After high school, Applicant enlisted in the Navy reserves in September 1985 and 
received a general discharge in April 1987 after testing positive for marijuana.1 In 
August or September 1999, he was arrested and charged with (1) Possession of 
Cannabis; (2) Firearm Owner’s Identification Cards; and (3) Carrying a Firearm/Unlawful 
Use of Weapon. He pleaded guilty and was fined $1,000 plus court costs. He disclosed 
the Cannabis and Carrying a Firearm charge under Question 23(f) of the August 2007 
SF 86, and later addressed the marijuana charges during an October 2007 interview. 
(GE 2 at 68)  
 
 In April 2003, Applicant and his girlfriend became embroiled in a domestic 
argument at his home after a concert. His girlfriend left the house, called the police, and 
filed a complaint against him. The police did not arrest him that night, but issued an 
arrest warrant. In October 2003, Applicant was stopped and arrested by the police on a 
charge of Third Degree Domestic Assault, Third/Subsequent Offense (a felony). Upon 
searching Applicant’s car, the police found an unregistered gun that Applicant had 
purchased for protection because he lived in a dangerous neighborhood. He was taken 
to the police station and charged with Unlawful Use of Weapon, and Receiving Stolen 
Property. His gun was confiscated and he stayed in jail for 24 hours before being 
released. After leaving the police station he never received any information about the 
incidents. Later, all of charges were later dismissed. (GE 3) He did not disclose the 
October 2003 charges under Question 23(a) because he did not know they existed until 
he met with a Government investigator in October 2007. (Tr. 34) Applicant stated that 
he “was not trying to mislead . . . but overlooked the question or I didn’t read it properly.” 
(Tr. 28) He told the investigator about the situation during his October 2007 interview. 
(Id.; GE 2) 
 
 On May 24, 2005, Applicant forcibly entered his girlfriend’s house and began a 
physical altercation with her. A neighbor telephoned the police and he left the residence 
before they arrived. On June 3, 2005, while the police were responding to a call to tow a 
wanted vehicle in his neighborhood, Applicant inquired about the vehicle and was 
arrested on a Domestic Assault 3rd Degree and Burglary charges arising out of the May 
24, 2005 incident. He does not know why he was charged with burglary because he did 
not steal anything. The charges were later dismissed. He disclosed the arrest for 
assault under Question 23(f) of the SF 86. (GE 1 at 127) He has not been arrested 
since June 2005 or owned a gun since 2003. (Tr. 41) 
 
 In follow-up to an October 2007 interview with the Government about his 
answers in the SF 86, Applicant completed Interrogatories in January 2008, specifically 
addressing previous drug use. In it, he disclosed that he purchased and used illegal 
drugs, including marijuana, at least five or six times per year, from the late 1980’s to 
                                            
1Applicant discussed his discharge for marijuana use in an October 2007 interview with a 
Government investigator. (GE 2 at 68)  
 
 
 
 
4
approximately December 2004. In response to Question 8 on the Interrogatories 
regarding his initial failure to list his drug use on the SF 86, he wrote, “I did. When I read 
the question in Section 24 I miss interped (sic) the question. But I did include a charge 
from 1999 of cannabis.” (GE 2 at 24)  While testifying, he elaborated on the issue 
stating that he did not have a specific reason for not disclosing it, as he had no intention 
of falsifying the SF 86. He thinks he was too overwhelmed at the time and in a hurry to 
finish it because he was told to submit it within 20 days. It was the first time he filled out 
the application and he had no help from his employer. He went to the library to complete 
it. (Tr. 29-30; 85) In discussing his past drug use, he admitted that he made poor 
decisions. (Answer) He no longer associates with friends who smoke marijuana. (Tr. 36) 
 
 During the October 2007 interview, Applicant told the investigator about a verbal 
altercation that occurred in September 2007 with his girlfriend. He wanted to be open 
with the Government in the event any charges were filed later. (GE 2 at 69) At the 
hearing, he testified that he no longer is involved with that girlfriend. (Tr. 68)  
 
 From 1999 until 2004, Applicant helped support his girlfriend’s two children, who 
lived nearby.2 When he filed his income tax returns for those years, he claimed them as 
dependent foster-children based on a conversation he had with someone at the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). (Tr. 31; 47-48) Applicant stated that he had a letter authorizing 
the deduction for 1999, but did not produce it. During his October 2007 interview, he 
told the investigator that the IRS notified him in 2004 that he owed $4,000 for the 
disallowed deductions he took for the two children for several years, and subsequently 
the IRS garnished his tax refunds for 2000 through 2004. (GE 2 at 70) 
 
 Applicant filed his 2004 federal tax return in January 2005. He filed his 2005 and 
2006 federal returns in or about January 2008, well past the deadline. He attributed his 
late filing to a philosophical difference and irritation with the IRS. (Tr. 52) As of the 
hearing, he owes about $2,770 in tax liability for the tax years of 1999, 2004 and 2005, 
and for “Liabilities not shown,” as noted on AE B.  In January 2008, his tax liability was 
$4,000. Since then, he has been making monthly payments of $237 on that outstanding 
bill. The record does not contain any evidence explaining the basis of the outstanding 
liability for any of those years. He asserted that he filed his 2007 federal returns and 
paid his taxes, but did not provide documentation to support his claim. (Tr. 64)  
  
 Applicant admitted that over the years he has done plumbing work for 
companies, family and friends and did not report to the IRS the income he earned. (Tr. 
56-57) He understood he was required to report all of his income and will do so in the 
future.  (Tr. 71) 
  
 Applicant submitted his Employee Performance Review for July 2007 to July 
2008. His supervisor gave him an overall rating of “3” out of a possible “5.”  (AE C) 
                                            
2 On Form 8867, which is included in the 2004 federal tax return, Applicant answered “yes” to 
Question 8 that asked whether the child for whom a deduction is being taken, resided with Applicant for 
over half of the year. (GE 2)  
 
 
 
 
5
 Applicant was candid about his previous arrests, drug use, and tax issues, albeit 
at times confusing about the details. He repeatedly stated that he was not trying to 
mislead the Government when he completed the SF 86, knowing that it had access to 
his history. (Tr. 85) He stated: 
  
I would just like to say I just feel like because of the things I went through, 
I feel like I’m a better person. I just made some bad decisions and I’m 
looking forward to redeeming myself the next twenty-five or thirty years of 
my life. Just being a better citizen and a better person.” (Tr. 83-84) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
 
 
 
6
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
Applicant admitted that he has a history of criminal conduct allegations and 
arrests: in 1987 he tested positive for marijuana; in 1999 he was arrested and convicted 
of carrying a firearm and possession of marijuana; in 2003 he was arrested for domestic 
assault, unlawful use of a weapon and receiving stolen property; in 2005 he was 
arrested for domestic assault and burglary; and from 1987 to 2004, he used marijuana 
illegally. The evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualification. 
After the Government raised these security concerns, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or produce evidence to prove mitigation. AG ¶ 32 provides one 
condition that could potentially mitigate security concerns under this guideline: 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
Applicant’s last arrest occurred in June 2005, almost four years ago. He 
has not used marijuana since December 2004. There is no evidence of criminal 
charges for the illegal use of drugs since 1999. Throughout this proceeding, he 
expressed remorse about his criminal past and poor judgment. He submitted his 
most recent job performance evaluation that indicates he is performing well and 
meeting his supervisor’s expectations. Hence, there is evidence of rehabilitation, 
 
 
 
 
7
such that this mitigating condition is applicable to the allegations involving 
criminal conduct, including the illegal use and purchase of marijuana.    
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 4: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as 
amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, 
stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; and 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Applicant admitted that he was discharged from the Navy in 1987 after testing 
positive for marijuana and that he used and purchased marijuana for approximately 17 
years, from the late 1980’s until December 2004. He was also convicted of purchasing 
and possessing marijuana in 1999. The evidence is sufficient to raise said 
disqualifications.  
AG ¶ 26 provides one condition that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
 
 
 
 
8
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
Applicant stopped using marijuana in December 2004, over four years ago. He 
repeatedly acknowledged that he exercised poor judgment while using it. He appears 
committed to remaining abstinent. Hence, the evidence is sufficient to trigger a partial 
application of AG ¶ 26(b)(3), but not its full application, because there is no independent 
evidence, such as random drug screenings or an evaluation from an appropriately 
credentialed health care professional, to corroborate his assertion that he has not used 
marijuana since December 2004. Such evidence is necessary, given his 17-year history 
of marijuana use. He no longer associates with the people with whom he previously 
used marijuana, which merits a limited application of AG ¶ 26(b)(1), due to a lack of 
verification of his statements. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out 
in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and maybe 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
 
 
 
 
9
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant falsified his answer to 
Question 23b: Your Police Record, in that he failed to disclose his October 2003 arrest 
involving a weapons charge. It alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b that in response to Question 23f: 
Your Police Record, he deliberately failed to disclose the 2005 burglary charge and the 
2003 assault and weapons charges. It further alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c that in response to 
Question 24a: Your Use of Illegal Drugs, he deliberately failed to disclose his illegal 
drug use from the 1980’s to 2004. The Government contended that those omissions 
may raise a security concern and be disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant denied 
these allegations.  
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the 
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
Applicant did not disclose the October 2003 charges because he was unaware of 
the weapons charge. At the time of his arrest, the police stopped him based on an April 
2003 arrest warrant for a domestic incident. Because he had a gun in his car when 
arrested, they also charged him with a weapons offense, unbeknownst to him. Because 
he never went to court on any of the charges or received any additional information 
about them, he did not realize that he was required to disclose them. Nor was he aware 
of the May 2005 burglary charge that had been filed against him when he was arrested 
in June 2005 on an assault offense. All of the 2003 and 2005 charges were later 
dismissed. Given his disclosure of the 1999 weapons and marijuana charges, and the 
2005 assault charge, his explanation is plausible and believable. 
 
Applicant admitted that he did not disclose his history of marijuana use in the SF 
86, which he subsequently detailed in a January 2008 interrogatory after an October 
2007 interview. He had no clear explanation for the specific omission, but knew he listed 
the 1999 drug charges. During a follow-up interview, he explained the basis for his 
general discharge from the Navy, relating to marijuana use, and the 1999 marijuana 
charge. He also disclosed a recent September 2007 incident with his girlfriend in an 
effort to be forthcoming. 
 
Applicant asserted that he did not intentionally withhold any information, but felt 
rushed to complete the SF 86 (for the first time) and left out facts as a result. He did not 
receive any assistance or guidance from his employer about the process. He knew the 
Government had access to his past and he would have no reason to hide information. 
During the October 2007 interview, he candidly discussed those issue raised by the 
 
 
 
 
10
investigator. After reviewing the record and listening to him testify, Applicant’s  
explanations for leaving information out of SF 86 regarding his police record and drug 
history are sufficiently credible, such that I find that the omissions were not                      
intentional. Hence, the evidence does not establish deliberate falsification as to SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b and 1.c. These allegations are found in his favor.    
 
In addition to the above falsification allegations, the SOR alleged under this 
guideline issues pertaining to income taxes and a general discharge from the military. 
Based on the record, there is sufficient evidence to raise a potential disqualification 
under AG ¶ 16(c). Applicant asserted that he had authorization to take two children, 
who did not live with him, as deductions on his income taxes for the years 1999 to 2004. 
In 2004, he verified that they lived with him more than half of the year, despite testifying 
that they lived nearby. Although he claimed he had a letter authorizing the deduction, at 
least for 1999, he did not produce it. It appears that some of his current outstanding tax 
liabilities are related to the wrongfully claimed deductions, as he previously stated 
during an interview. As a consequence of his interactions with the IRS subsequent to 
filing his returns for 1999 through 2004, he deliberately failed to file his 2005 and 2006 
tax returns and report other earned income. These tax issues, which were ongoing into 
January 2008, when he decided to resolve them, coupled with his general discharge 
from the Navy for misconduct in 1987, constitute sufficient credible information in the 
area of finances and drugs, which when considered as a whole, demonstrate a lack of 
good judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and indicate that 
he may not properly safeguard protected information if he comes into contact with it.  
 
AG ¶ 17 describes a condition that could mitigate the disqualification raised in 
this case: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Although Applicant remorsefully acknowledged his wrongful behavior as it 
pertains to his taxes and marijuana use, he did not produce any evidence to verify that 
he is no longer involved with drugs, had authorization to take the child deductions or 
filed his 2007 tax return on time and paid his taxes, as he testified. Hence, the above 
condition is not applicable.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
 
 
 
11
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 42-year-old man, 
whose past is blemished by a 17-year history of using marijuana, several arrests and 
tax issues, beginning in 1987 with a drug incident and spanning into January 2008 when 
he filed tax returns that were several years late. In July 2007, he began his current 
position as a plumber and recently earned a good job performance evaluation for his 
first year. While discussing his history, he candidly acknowledged his past problems and 
expressed a desire to move forward and live a more productive life. His change of 
attitude is commendable. However, to-date he has not established a sufficient track 
record to assure the Government that similar problems will not recur in the future, in 
particular maintaining abstinence from drugs and complying with income tax codes.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under criminal conduct and drug 
involvement, but not those concerns raised under personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a –1.c:               For Applicant  
 Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.e:   Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 1.f    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.k:    Withdrawn 
 
 
 
 
 
12
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:           FOR APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 2.a:   Withdrawn 
   Subparagraph 2.b -2.i:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 2.j – 2.l:   Withdrawn  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline H:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
    Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.d:                  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
    
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
