                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-17913 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 28, 2005, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On June 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 3, 2008.  He 
answered the SOR in writing on September 4, 2008, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. I received the case assignment on October 9, 2008. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on October 20, 2008, setting the hearing for November 7, 2008.  I 
granted Applicant’s request for a delay because his truck broke down and he could not 
get to the hearing.  On November 18, 2008, I entered an order setting the continued 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
hearing no later than January 21, 2009.  Another Notice of Hearing was issued on 
January 12, 2009, setting the rescheduled hearing for January 27, 2009.  I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on that day. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A 
through N, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
February 9, 2009. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 
10, 2009, to submit additional matters.  On that day, he submitted Exhibits O to S, 
without objection. The record closed on February 10, 2009. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 4, 2008, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k of the SOR, with 
explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.l of the SOR. He 
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
Applicant is 57 years old, has a high school degree, is married to his third wife, 
and has two children from his prior marriages.  His children are all adults.  Applicant has 
been a truck driver for the past 18 years.  Some of the cargo he hauled until his stroke 
was for the Defense Department (DoD). In July 2008, he had a mild stroke, and now 
has high blood pressure.  Under U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) rules, he 
cannot drive a truck again until at least July 2009. His employer removed his DoD 
qualifications at the same time.  He had no adverse situations while hauling DoD cargo.  
When he was driving with his wife, who is also a truck driver and has a security 
clearance, they could earn about $5,000 monthly.  Now, with just his wife driving the 
truck because he cannot drive under the DOT rules, they earn about $2,000 monthly.  
He and his wife support a daughter who has five minor children and is unable to work 
because of medical conditions.  Applicant spends about $1,200 monthly to rent an 
apartment and pay for a truck for the daughter.  Applicant and his wife have no 
permanent home, but live in their truck’s living compartment, because they are 
constantly on the highway to earn money from their truck. His prior truck was destroyed 
in an accident in 2000, which started Applicant’s financial difficulties, and the stroke 
compounded them. (Tr. 14, 24, 25, 26, 28-37, 61; Exhibits 1, D) 
 
Applicant submitted pictures of his truck, decorated to show his support for the 
U.S. Armed Forces.  He also submitted letters from his trucking company supervisors 
and a person who knows him because both their children are in the military together.  
All state Applicant is an honest, hardworking man of integrity who provides excellent 
trucking services to his customers. (Tr. 27; Exhibits A-C) 
 
The SOR lists 12 delinquent debts, totaling about $87,000.  Five of the debts 
have been paid, while the remainder are unpaid.  The two largest groups of debts are 
medical expenses for himself and his wife, and credit card debts.  Applicant also was 
 
3 
 
 
paying some debts, but when he had his stroke and could not drive, his income dropped 
by over 50% and he could not maintain the payment programs. (Tr. 38-56; Exhibits 2-6, 
E to S) 
 
Applicant paid the following debts: a telephone debt of $956 on December 8, 
2006 (¶ 1.a); $254 to a bank on a gasoline credit card on or before May 21, 2008 (¶ 1.f); 
$73,883 on a mobile home debt by a warranty deed in lieu of foreclosure on April 28, 
2003; and $1,477 on a credit card debt on March 30, 2007 (¶ 1.l).  While those debts 
remain on Applicant’s credit record, his documents show they have been resolved.  
Applicant has not been diligent in having his credit record reflect the payments or 
resolution of these debts. (Tr. 38, 43, 44-46; Exhibits 2-6, F, H, K, and S) 
 
Applicant owes the following medical debts: $287 (¶ 1.b); $99 (¶ 1.c); $69 (¶ 1.d); 
$192 (¶ 1.i); and $75 for a medical debt for his wife (¶ 1.j).  These debts have not been 
paid because they were small and Applicant overlooked them as he drove around the 
United States in his truck. (Tr. 39-41, 50, 51, 56; Exhibits 2-6) 
 
The two credit card debts Applicant owes are: $550 as listed in the SOR, but now 
the balance is $300 after Applicant made some payments which he had to cease 
because his income decreased last year (¶ 1.e); and $396 after making payments until 
about eight months ago (¶ 1.h).  Applicant’s exhibit shows he entered an installment 
payment agreement on February 4, 2009, for $50 each month on a new balance of 
$487.60 on this debt. (Tr. 41-43, 48; Exhibits 2-6, O)  
 
The delinquent debt in ¶ 1.k of the SOR is for $8,767, owed on a car for which 
Applicant co-signed the note.  The car was for his daughter with the five children.  He 
was making payments on the debt until July 2008 when he had his stroke, and could not 
drive and earn as much as he was while driving.  The car was repossessed by the 
lender, sold at auction, and the $8,767 balance owed remains.  The original amount 
was $16,289.54.  He was paying $100 to $200 monthly on the debt. (Tr. 51, 52; Exhibits 
2-6, I) 
 
Applicant’s repayment plan for his debts is to pay the medical debts first, then the 
smaller debts, and working up to the car loan debt.  Applicant also owes Federal income 
taxes for the years 2004 to 2006.  He filed his returns, but did not have the money to 
pay the taxes.  As an independent contractor, he did not withhold sufficient money to 
pay his taxes.  His employer did not have to withhold any tax payments because of the 
contractual arrangement between them.  Applicant was paying the taxes pursuant to an 
installment agreement until his stroke.  He currently owes $38,348.65, according to his 
exhibit, but thinks he owes about $13,000 because of lower income they earned in later 
years which may earn them a refund, and the mistakes made by his tax preparer for the 
relevant tax years. These tax debts do not appear on the Government exhibits which 
are credit reports, dated for 2005, 2008, and 2009.  (Tr. 56; Exhibits 2, 3, 5, 6, R) 
 
Applicant submitted two exhibits to show he has paid four other debts not listed 
in the SOR.  He paid a mortgage on another property, a credit card debt of $45, a 
 
4 
 
 
medical bill for about $226 in 2006, and a telephone bill on July 31, 2006.  He has 
payment agreements on two other debts not listed in the SOR.  He owes a hospital bill 
of $500 and had paid down the debt starting in 2007.  He will resume payments in 
February 2009 of $100 monthly.  He owes $305.57 on a credit card and made a $50 
payment on January 31, 2009, and every month thereafter. He has not incurred new 
debt in the past year. (Exhibits G, L, M, N, P and Q)    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to pay some 
obligations since 2000 after his truck accident.  He owes seven delinquent debts listed 
in the SOR. The first six smallest of these debts total $1,022.  The seventh debt is for 
the unpaid balance on a car purchased for his daughter, being $8,767.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
After analyzing Applicant’s delinquent debts and his actions to date to resolve 
them, they are actually less than would appear on the SOR. For example, Applicant 
owes only $1,022 on the smallest six debts, an amount which he could pay without any 
difficulty, and to which he committed to paying.  Then he would have the next largest 
debt to pay, which would be the car loan balance of $8,767. 
 
Applicant admitted two groups of debts not listed on the SOR which he is paying 
to show his good-faith efforts at paying his overall debt obligations.  Applicant is paying 
the $1,200 in small debts.  Finally, Applicant has only the Federal tax debt to pay when 
he resumes his installment payment agreement. That amount seems to be in dispute 
between Applicant and the Internal Revenue Service. That agreement and other 
installment payment agreements were interrupted when he lost income after his July 
2008 stroke.  
 
 
6 
 
 
His financial support of his daughter and her five children in the amount of $1,200 
monthly from his current $2,000 monthly income also has adversely affected his ability 
to pay his debts.  When he resumes driving after July 2009, he can earn more money, 
which should make it easier for him to repay his debts.  He should have the paid debts 
removed from his credit reports so his credit report will not reflect resolved debts and 
look worse than it actually is.   
 
Specifically, the guideline also includes examples of conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose sometime after 2000. They became 
aggravated when he could not drive and earn the income he formerly earned.  He 
accumulated delinquent debt due to support for his daughter and grandchildren and his 
unemployment under Federal rules as a long haul truck driver. These circumstances 
continue, and will for the foreseeable future regarding his daughter and her family. I find 
the behavior occurred under some unusual circumstances, but it is likely to recur.   
However, because of the unique combination of events, it does not raise concerns 
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment based on his 
performance record and the character statements. The evidence raises this potentially 
partially mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, the 
financial problems arose from his 2000 truck accident, and then his medical problems of 
the stroke and high blood pressure compounded them by causing the lengthy current 
period of unemployment as a truck driver under DOT rules. He acted responsibly in 
resolving five of these debts before the SOR was issued. He is trying to pay the 
remaining delinquent debts within his financial capacity. I find this potentially mitigating 
condition is a factor for consideration in this case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is not present; hence the potentially mitigating condition under AG & 20(c) is not 
applicable.  
 
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has 
been resolving delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement, while supporting 
himself, his wife, and six other people. If he were earning the income he earned up to 
July 2008, he would now be financially sound and prepared for future contingencies.  
Because of his continuing efforts to pay his debts, even while traveling as a truck driver, 
 
7 
 
 
and not incurring any new substantial debt, I conclude this potentially mitigating 
condition applies. 
 
The two remaining mitigating conditions, legitimate reasons to contest a debt, 
and affluence resulting from a legal source of income, do not apply to this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant has a health problem 
which prevents him from earning his former income, with which he could easily resolve 
these debts.  All but one of the SOR listed debts currently unpaid total only $1,022, a 
miniscule amount of debt.  The remaining large debt is $8,767 for the car loan.  Of the 
SOR listed debt total of about $87,000, Applicant has resolved nearly $77,000 worth of 
delinquent debt. He is paying other unlisted debts on the installment basis, which debts 
total about $1,200. These payment efforts show his good-faith and continued 
commitment to repaying his delinquent debts. The debts are manageable if his former 
income were to be restored.  Applicant has applied himself to paying his debts, but is 
limited by his health, which is not his fault.  His stroke limits his ability to earn sufficient 
income to pay all the debts more rapidly than he is doing so.  He has not incurred new 
delinquent debt during this period.  He did not voluntarily spend himself into the current 
situation.  There is no potential for pressure or coercion, because it was not wanton 
spending which placed Applicant in this situation.  Once he resumes his driving career, 
and keeps his truck moving and earning income, he can resolve his remaining debts. 
When hauling the DoD cargoes in the past, Applicant had no adverse situations or 
reports.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  I conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
