FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 07-18446 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) on March 6, 
2006. On August 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline 
M, Use of Information Technology Systems, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 15, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
November 17, 2008. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
November 17, 2008. The case was transferred to me on December 12, 2008. On 
February 6, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for February 
23, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government called two witnesses 
and offered three exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 3, 
without objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses and offered two exhibits 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
2
which was admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. DOHA received the transcript 
of hearing on March 3, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to position of public trust is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, but 
denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b.  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old senior technology architect employed with a 
Department of Defense contractor seeking a position of public trust.  He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since May 2005. He is married and has an 18-
year-old son and a sixteen-year-old stepson. He has a bachelor’s degree in 
aeronautical and astronautical engineering and has taken some graduate level courses. 
He has held some form of a security clearance or position of public trust since 1982. (Tr 
at 5-7, 15-16, 93; Gov 1) 
 
From January 1981 to February 2005, Applicant was employed with another 
defense contractor.  His last position with the contractor was senior staff engineer. His 
employer issued him a laptop computer for him to use in order to fulfill his duties. He 
was authorized to take the laptop with him when he traveled for the company. Applicant 
traveled quite often. (Tr at 15-16, 93)  
 
Applicant’s previous employer had rules which prohibited the use of company 
computers to visit pornographic and/or adult websites. The rules also prohibited the use 
of the company computer to view pornographic pictures and/or download pornographic 
videos.  Applicant admits that he was aware of the above company rules. He signed a 
statement acknowledging that he was aware of the rules pertaining to the proper use of 
the computer. (Tr at 16-17) The Manager of the company’s Security Operations and 
Investigations Department, stated the rules prohibiting the use of company computers to 
access pornography was widely known by all of the company’s employees. (Tr at 44)  
 
From August 2004 to July 2005, Applicant was assigned to work at one of the 
company’s other offices which was located in another state. He would work at that 
location on Monday through Friday but flew home on the weekends. One morning in 
late December or early January 2005, Applicant visited an adult web-site using his 
company laptop computer. He downloaded several videos. He agrees that the videos 
and the web-site were probably X-rated but states they contained no images of sexual 
intercourse.  He admits that he was aware that he was violating company policy when 
he accessed the adult web-site. He claims that he only viewed the adult web-site using 
the company laptop computer on that one occasion. After he visited the web-site, 
numerous pop-ups came up for other adult web-sites. (Tr at 18 – 23)   
 
In late December or early January 2005, Applicant’s laptop computer broke 
down. He contacted the company information technology department and gave them his 
company laptop in order for them to repair it.  While repairing the laptop, a technician 
discovered pornographic files on Applicant’s laptop. This information was forwarded to 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
3
Security Operations and Investigations Office on January 7, 2005. (Tr at 23, 43-44: Gov 
2; Gov 3) 
 
On January 10, 2005, Applicant was called into the Security Operations and 
Investigations office. He was interviewed by the manager of the department about the 
pornography that was found on his company laptop. He initially denied that he accessed 
the adult web-site using his company laptop. He initially blamed it on his teenage son 
and his friends. Approximately five to ten minutes into the interview, the investigator 
asked him how his son was able to access the adult web-site since a password and 
login was required to access the lap top. Applicant then admitted to accessing the adult 
web-sites on his lap top but claims that he was using his own separate network. He 
believed that he had erased the images from the system. (Tr at 24 -29, 49-50)   
 
On February 7, 2005, Applicant was terminated from the company for violation 
and misuse of information technology.  The manager of security operations and 
investigations testified. He conducted the internal investigation and interviewed 
Applicant. He personally examined the images on Applicant’s company computer and 
concluded they were pornographic. The computer images were saved and an internal 
investigation was conducted. He observed approximately 10 to 15 short videos and 
some still photographs.  He observed approximately 1,500 pornographic images on the 
computer that could not be downloaded.  He believes that these pornographic images 
were viewed and downloaded over a seven-month period on more than one occasion. 
There were 16 videos and eight pornographic web-sites in the files on Applicant’s 
computer. (Tr at 43-48)  
 
When the manager questioned Applicant he does not recall whether he asked 
Applicant how many times he may have visited pornographic web-sites. He does not 
recall Applicant indicating how many times he had accessed pornographic web-sites 
using the company laptop. (Tr at 50) During the internal company investigation, still 
pictures and video clips were saved to a DVD. About 1,500 images that were not 
downloaded on Applicant’s laptop were deleted. Applicant’s company laptop was then 
purged of all pornographic images. The laptop was returned to Applicant after the 
pornographic images were purged. (Tr at 50 -52)  The DVD was not presented as part 
of the government’s case.       
 
After Applicant was terminated, he worked as an independent contractor for his 
current employer. In April 2005, he was hired as a full-time employee. On March 6, 
2006, he submitted a Public Trust Position Application, SF 85P. In response to question 
“7. Your Employment Record,” he listed that he was fired from his previous employer on 
February 7, 2005 for “Violation of company policy regarding personal use of company-
provided computer while on TDY.” (Gov 1) 
 
Applicant met with an investigator conducting his trustworthiness background 
investigation on several occasions. (Applicant recalls meeting with the investigator on 
three occasions. The investigator recalls meeting with Applicant on two occasions. The 
number of occasions is not relevant to the facts of this case.) The investigator first met 
with Applicant on October 24, 2007, to discuss Applicant’s termination from his previous 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
4
employer for misusing the computer. He authenticated the summary of the unsworn 
declaration which he prepared the same day of the interview which is Government 
Exhibit 3.  He does not recall the specific questions asked during the interview.  The 
investigator does not recall discussing the issue pertaining to Applicant initially denying 
that he was responsible for the pornographic material on the company laptop. (Tr at 63)    
    
In May 2008, the investigator was contacted and asked to have Applicant 
prepare a written affidavit.  He met with Applicant on May 15, 2008, in the parking lot of 
a fast food chain.  Applicant had limited time because he had a conference call that 
morning. The investigator prepared the affidavit himself with the summary of Applicant’s 
initial interview which is Government Exhibit 3.  He wrote the affidavit in the first person.  
When he met with Applicant, he had Applicant review the affidavit and allowed him the 
opportunity to make any changes. He had Applicant initial and sign the affidavit.  The 
investigator did not ask Applicant any questions during this meeting.  He did not swear  
Applicant to an oath when he signed the affidavit. (Tr at 61-63, 111-114)  
 
Applicant disputes that he accessed pornography using his company computer 
numerous times over a seven month period. He claims he visited an adult web-site only 
once. He claims that when the security office returned the company laptop to him, the 
pornographic web-sites remained on the computer.  He offered AE A and AE B which  
allegedly contain the links, addresses, and/or the pornographic web-sites that were 
contained on his company laptop.  Both documents are given less weight because 
Applicant had the opportunity to show these documents to the manager of the Security 
Operations and Investigations Office to verify that these were the documents they 
retrieved from his computer during his testimony.  He offered these documents after the 
witness had left since neither side wished to hold him subject to recall after testifying. 
Applicant said that if there was only one thing that he would take back was that he 
wished he would have told the truth from the beginning. (Tr at 94 – 107)  
 
Applicant’s current supervisor testified that he has known Applicant since 2004. 
They worked on a contract proposal together when Applicant was employed with his 
previous company. In 2005, Applicant started work as an independent consultant for the 
company. He was eventually hired as a full-time employee. The witness supervised 
Applicant since that time. He still has daily contact with Applicant. He states Applicant’s 
performance reviews state that he meets or exceeds expectations. Applicant’s work is 
exemplary. He is very detail oriented and has a strong work ethic. Applicant is 
conscientious about time-keeping and billing the proper hours. He has no difficulty 
following corporate security policies. Applicant passed a reliability check with the 
Department of Homeland Security. Since working for the company, Applicant has not 
had any violations pertaining to the misuse of computers. The supervisor states 
Applicant is very trustworthy and recommends him for a security clearance. (It is noted 
that Applicant is applying for a position of public trust.) (Tr at 74-83) 
 
A co-worker of Applicant testified that he has known him for over 25 years.  
Applicant is currently his program manager but they worked together at a prior defense 
contractor. Their current interaction at work is between every few days to once a week. 
They occasionally socialize outside of work such as going to lunch or dinner. They 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
5
played golf a couple times.  He describes Applicant as one of the most honest and “by 
the rules” people he knows. Applicant follows company policies. He recommends 
Applicant for a security clearance. The co-worker has a bachelor’s degree in computer 
science. He testified cookies or files can be stored on a computer through a third party 
without the owner of the computer’s knowledge. (Tr at 83 – 90)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as Asensitive positions.@  
(See Regulation && C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  AThe standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person=s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.@ (See 
Regulation & C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation & C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge=s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG & 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the Awhole person concept.@ The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
6
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
      
Analysis 
 
USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS 
 
 The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information 
Technology Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
 Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under Guideline M (M DC) apply to 
Applicant’s case: 
  
 M DC ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system) 
 
 M DC ¶ 40(f) (introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, 
software, or media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations) 
 
 Applicant demonstrated extremely poor judgment when he accessed 
pornographic web-sites using his company laptop. He admits to being aware of the 
company rules prohibiting the use of company computers to access pornographic web-
sites when he accessed the pornographic web-sites suing his company laptop.  He had 
no special authorization for accessing pornographic web-sites using the company 
computer. Nor did he have permission to download pornographic files on his company 
 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
7
laptop. While there is a dispute as to the extent of pornographic files that Applicant 
viewed and over what period of time, there is no factual dispute that Applicant violated 
company policy by accessing pornographic web-sites using his company laptop.  As a 
result, he was terminated after working 24 years for the company.  
 
 The concerns under Guideline M can be mitigated. I find that Guideline M 
Mitigating Condition (M MC) ¶ 41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies to Applicant’s case.  Although Applicant exercised extremely poor 
judgment when he accessed the pornography using his company laptop, more than four 
years has passed since his termination in February 2005.   He has been employed full-
time with another defense contractor. He has not been involved in similar incidents at 
his new employer. His current supervisor thinks highly of him and recommends him for 
a trustworthiness position. His poor judgment in his previous job resulted in the loss of a  
24-year career. He clearly learned a lesson.  Considering the price Applicant paid for his 
extreme lapse of judgment, and that more than four years have passed with no similar 
conduct his current workplace, the concerns raised under Guideline M have been 
mitigated.   
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There are specific disqualifying conditions which may be raised. With respect to 
SOR ¶ 2.a which alleges that Applicant denied knowledge of pornographic material on 
his company laptop when he was interviewed during the internal company investigation 
in January 2005, the following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) 
apply to the facts of this case: 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative) 
  
 PC DC ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
8
community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging, in any activity that is 
illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and 
may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group)  
 
 Applicant admits that he initially lied to the security manager who interviewed him 
regarding the discovery of pornography on his company laptop. He deliberately 
provided misleading information by claiming that his son and his son’s friends used his 
company laptop to access his computer. He did so out of concern as to the 
consequences if he admitted to it. 
  
 The personal conduct concern can be mitigated. With respect to SOR ¶ 2.a, I find 
the following personal conduct mitigating conditions (PC MC) apply: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17 (d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress)  
 
 Applicant misled the investigator for approximately ten minutes prior to 
acknowledging that he actually accessed pornographic web-sites using his company 
laptop. While his initial denial demonstrated poor judgment, he made the decision to be 
truthful during the same interview and misled the investigator for only a brief period of 
time. He acknowledged his behavior. Since that time, he provided full disclosure for the 
basis for his termination when he submitted his public trust application in March 2006.  
He has had a successful career for over four years with his current employer, always 
meeting or exceeding the standards expected of him.  No similar incidents have 
occurred since his termination in February 2005.  Applicant mitigated the personal 
conduct concerns raised under SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
 SOR ¶ 2.b alleges Applicant provided a misleading statement in his written 
statement provided on May 15, 2008, by not indicating that he first denied that the 
pornographic material was his when confronted by the security representative about the 
pornographic content on his government laptop. I find for Applicant with regard to this 
allegation.  The investigator who interviewed Applicant and prepared the statement in 
question does not recall whether the issue about Applicant’s initial denials ever came up 
during the first interview in October 24, 2007, and on May 15, 2008. The affidavit was 
 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
9
prepared by the investigator for Applicant to sign based on the investigator’s summary 
of October 24, 2007 interview. The investigator did not interview Applicant on May 15, 
2008. He met Applicant on that date for Applicant to review and sign the affidavit. He did 
not ask Applicant to provide him step-by-step details as to what occurred when he was 
interviewed by the company security investigator during the internal investigation related 
to the pornography found on Applicant’s company laptop. I cannot conclude that 
Applicant provided misleading information in his May 15, 2008 statement. Given the 
general questions that were asked, it does not appear Applicant deliberately omitted the 
fact that he initially denied that he was responsible for the pornography found on his 
company laptop when he was first confronted. SOR ¶ 2.b is found for Applicant.  
 
 Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline E. The personal conduct 
concern is found for Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance and/or trustworthiness position by 
considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The 
Administrative Judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance and/or trustworthiness position must 
be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 24-year 
history with his previous employer. I considered that he was a mature adult who was 
aware of company rules pertaining to accessing pornography using his company laptop. 
I considered that he initially denied responsibility when he was interviewed by company 
security personnel regarding the pornography found on his computer. Applicant 
demonstrated extremely poor judgment which ultimately led to his termination from a 
company he worked at for over 24 years. However, since then he has successfully 
worked for another company for over four years with no repeats of similar incidents. He 
is a valued employee at his current job. Given the severity of the consequences 
resulting from Applicant’s poor judgment, it is unlikely that he will repeat similar conduct 
in the future. Applicant learned a very difficult lesson. He mitigated the security 
concerns raised under Guideline M and Guideline E and demonstrated that he is worthy 
to be granted a position of public trust.  
 
FOR OFFICAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this information contains information  
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
10
    Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 Paragraph 1 Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2 Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant   
   Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a trustworthiness 
position.  Eligibility for a position of public trust is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
