 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18024 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Personal Representative1 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns arising from his possession of a valid Israeli passport and his relationship and 
contacts with a family member residing in the Palestinian occupied territory. He 
mitigated the personal conduct security concern. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 28, 2006. On May 28 and August 28,2 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the government’s security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference), 
1  The name of the personal representative was omitted from the decision for security and privacy 
reasons. 
 
2  Amendment to the Statement of Reasons. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).3 The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24 and September 28, 2008, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
November 24, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 26, 2008, 
scheduling a hearing on December 17, 2008.  
 
At the hearing, the government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. GEs 1 through 
3, were admitted without objection (Tr. 23). GE 4 is a government motion for me to take 
administrative notice of facts regarding Israel and the Palestinian territories.4 Applicant 
objected to the accuracy of some of the motion’s proffered facts, but not to me taking 
administrative notice or considering the attached documents (Tr. 23-25). His objection 
was sustained. I took administrative notice of facts I personally considered relevant and 
material to this case. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented three 
witnesses and no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 29, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On August 28, 2008, the government moved to amend the May 28, 2008 SOR. 
The amendment to the SOR deleted all subparagraphs under SOR ¶¶ 1 and 2. It added 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.f to SOR ¶ 1, and ¶¶ 2.a through 2.k to SOR ¶ 2. It also added SOR ¶ 
3, with three allegations under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  
 
 At the hearing, the government moved to correct the following typographical 
errors in its motion to amend the SOR: in the section entitled “Guideline B,” paragraph 
1), first line, “1.a” was changed to read “2.a,” twice. In the same section, paragraph 2), 
first line, “1.b” was changed to read “2.b,” twice. 
 
 Applicant did not object to the amendments to the SOR, or to the correction of 
the typographical errors. I granted both motions as requested (Tr. 13-14). 
 
3  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
4  GE 4 was marked for identification and considered for administrative notice only. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in amended SOR ¶¶ 1 and 2 
(hereinafter “SOR,” except for SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c, which he denied. He denied SOR ¶ 
2.a because his son is temporarily living in East Jerusalem (Palestinian occupied 
territory), not in Israel. He denied SOR ¶ 2.c because his daughter is a citizen of 
Canada, and a legal U.S. resident. He admitted SOR ¶ 3.c. He denied SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 
3.b. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old senior maintenance engineer working for a defense 
contractor. He was born, raised, and educated in Israel (GE 1, Tr. 169). He considers 
himself a Palestinian Christian, and acquired his Israeli citizenship because he was born 
and lived within Israel when it became a state. He completed two years of college in 
Israel (1968-1970) where he learned construction. After college, he worked in 
construction for a number of years. He was then hired by the Israeli government as a 
driver for the British ambassador to Israel, and worked that post for two years. He 
believes that while in that job he possessed some type of an Israeli security clearance 
(Tr. 125). He never served in the Israeli army or otherwise worked for the Israeli 
government because of his heritage as a Palestinian Christian. 
 
Applicant met his Jordanian born wife in Israel (Tr. 140). She is a distant relative, 
who came to Israel during the war and was educated in Israel. They were married in 
1973. Their two sons (G) and (R) were born in Israel. In 1978, at age 32, Applicant 
immigrated with his family to Canada seeking better opportunities for his children and to 
avoid the ongoing hostilities between Israel and Muslim states (Tr. 119-120). Applicant’s 
parents had immigrated to Canada around 1973, and he followed them. Applicant’s 
daughter was born in Canada.  
 
Applicant became a Canadian citizen in early 1981 and received a Canadian 
passport shortly thereafter. He used his Canadian passport to travel to France in 2000, 
Jordan, and numerous times to Israel. Applicant’s Canadian passport expired in 2003, 
and he does not intend to renew it (Tr. GE 3). While in Canada, he worked in 
construction and building maintenance. He also worked approximately 10 years for a 
Canadian airline (Tr. 181). He voted two or three times in Canadian elections (Tr. 135). 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in December 1981, because of the better 
working and living opportunities. He moved to the United States alone to work with his 
brother-in-law, while his family remained in Canada. He used to own two 
construction/management companies, one in Canada and one in the United States (Tr. 
121). He would spend the work week in the United States and travel during the 
weekends to visit with his family in Canada. 
 
In 1990, Applicant and his wife purchased a home in Canada. He considered that 
home his residence and lived in it until 2002, when he separated from his wife and 
moved back to the United States. He divorced his wife in 2006 (Tr. 29). As part of the 
divorce settlement, Applicant sold his interest in the marital home to his oldest son (G). 
 
4 
 
 
However, his name will remain in the property title until the mortgage is paid off in 
August 2009 and the property is formally transferred to his ex-wife and G. In 2007, he 
used the proceeds from the sale of his interest in the Canadian home to buy a home in 
the United States with his younger son (R) (Tr. 29, 58). Applicant owns no property, 
business, or any financial interests outside of the United States (Tr. 30).  
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999. His ex-wife is a Jordanian 
citizen and naturalized Canadian citizen residing in Canada. He testified she is also a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, but it is not clear when she was naturalized. Applicant’s ex-wife 
has numerous extended family members who are citizens and residents of Jordan. 
Before his divorce, Applicant had infrequent contact with his wife’s relatives and 
travelled to Jordan to visit her relatives. After 2002, when he separated from his wife, 
Applicant has maintained infrequent contact with her relatives in Jordan. 
 
Applicant’s sons, G and R, were born in Israel, and immigrated to Canada with 
his parents. They grew up, were educated in Canada, and became Canadian citizens. 
G became a Canadian citizen in 1981-1982, and has a valid Canadian passport (Tr. 
35). He also has a valid Israeli passport. He resided in the United States for two years 
while attending a prominent U.S. law school where he received a master’s degree in 
international law (Tr. 32, 56). After receiving his degree, G returned to Canada and 
worked four years for a commercial law firm and one year as a private practitioner (Tr. 
56).  
 
G became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003, and has a valid U.S. passport (Tr. 
35). He testified he holds American values and considers himself a U.S. citizen (Tr. 31). 
The longest period of time he has lived in the United States is two years. However, 
while growing up he travelled frequently to the United States during vacations and 
holidays and stayed for weeks at a time with relatives living in the United States (Tr. 58).  
 
In 2007, G was hired by an European organization to provide legal advice to the 
Palestinian leadership responsible for certain peace negotiations with Israel (Tr. 38). In 
this capacity, G interacts, represents and provides advice to the Palestine Liberation 
Organization (PLO) and its leadership, including the Chairman of the PLO (Tr. 39). He 
has access to PLO classified information (Tr. 51). He denied any known contact with 
HAMMAS or its members (Tr. 42). Since 2007, he has been residing in the Palestinian 
occupied territory.  
 
G believes he is part of a close-knit family. He calls and has contact with 
Applicant at least twice a week (Tr. 63). G visits his extended family members living in 
Israel on a monthly basis. He has close daily contact and friendship with Palestinians 
who work for the Palestinian authority (Tr.52-53).  His employment contract will expire in 
2009, at which time he intends to move permanently to the United States (Tr. 28). G 
uses any of his three passports to travel abroad for personal or business reasons based 
on convenience and expediency (Tr. 33-35). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s younger son, “R,” has a valid Canadian passport. He also has an 
expired Israeli passport which he does not intend to renew (Tr. 89). He attended college 
in the United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2000 (Tr. 88). He joined 
his father in the United States because of the better economic opportunities and his 
preference for the American culture. He has a general contracting business in the 
United States and travels to Canada frequently to visit his mother and other relatives.  
 
R’s younger sister lives with him in the United States. She is a legal U.S. resident 
and is applying for U.S. citizenship. R is in the process of organizing his family’s third 
family reunion, which is held every four years. His father and mother have 
approximately 150 family members living in the United States and Canada, including his 
mother’s parents and his father’s mother. He testified the number of family members 
residing in the United States and Canada by far outweighs the number of their relatives 
living in Israel and the Palestinian occupied territory. 
 
Applicant’s 86-year-old mother and his four siblings are dual citizens of Israel and 
Canada, and reside in Canada (Tr. 144-147). His mother receives a pension from the 
Canadian government. Applicant has telephone contact with his mother and siblings 
approximately three times a week. He travels to Canada to visit his relatives twice a 
month. 
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law (Z) (ex-wife’s brother) was born in Jordan and 
immigrated to the United States in 1972 (Tr. 75). He is a successful entrepreneur and 
owns a real state company as well as a construction and facility management company 
in the United States (Tr. 68-69). His construction company specializes in the 
construction of secured facilities for government agencies (Tr. 68).  
 
Applicant has worked for Z since the mid-1990s in construction work and 
managing facilities both as an employee and as an independent contractor. From 2002 
to 2006, he was the senior engineer and facility manager in charge of all the building 
systems, including the security system, for the building Applicant currently manages. 
When the building was turned over to the government contractor, Applicant was hired 
by the government contractor to remain in the position of senior engineer. He has been 
doing the same job, initially for his brother-in-law, and now the government contractor, 
during the last five years without any security problems or concerns (Tr. 109). 
 
Applicant was described as honest, completely trustworthy, and as a person with 
high integrity and judgment. His brother-in-law assessed him as conscientious, and 
responsible. He is highly respected for his knowledge and job performance (Tr. 71-71). 
 
As of the time of his hearing, Applicant possessed a valid Israeli passport that he 
renewed in 2003, and will not expire until 2013 (Tr. 138, GE 2). He renewed and used 
his Israeli passport for personal convenience (Tr. 134). He pays less tax when visiting 
Israel, and does not have to wait in long lines at the airport. Applicant travelled to Israel 
six times since August 2000, for family related matters, i.e., funerals and to visit family 
and friends (Tr. 132). He travelled to Israel using his Israeli passport three times since 
 
6 
 
 
2003. He travelled to Jordan in 2003 using his Israeli passport. Applicant has a valid 
U.S. passport that he renewed in 1999 and will not expire until March 2009.  
 
Applicant testified he has no intention to renew his Israeli passport (GE 3). He is 
a proud American, loves the United States, and only wants to be a U.S. citizen (Tr. 104-
105). He loves his job and it is important for him to possess a security clearance to 
retain his job. In his March 2008 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated his 
willingness to surrender his Canadian and Israeli passports (GE 3). At that time, he 
asked for guidance on how to surrender his Israeli passport. At his hearing, Applicant 
expressed his willingness to surrender his Canadian and Israeli citizenships (Tr. 104-
105). Applicant testified all his immediate family members reside in the United States or 
Canada. He has telephone contact with his extended family member residing in Israel 
once or twice a month or when he travels to Israel approximately once every two years 
(Tr. 146). 
 
The government alleged Applicant falsified his 2006 e-QIP because he failed to 
disclose in his answer to question 8.d.1, that he was a citizen of Israel. Applicant 
disclosed in his answer to the question that he was a citizen of Canada, but failed to 
disclose he is an Israeli citizen. The e-QIP also shows Applicant disclosed he was born 
in Israel (e-QIP, question 1), that he had foreign connections and contacts with Israel, 
and that he had an active Israeli passport (e-QIP, question 17).  
 
The government also alleged Applicant falsified his 2006 e-QIP because he 
failed to disclose in his answer to question 17.d, that he had an active Canadian 
passport. In his answer to the question, Applicant disclosed that he had an active Israeli 
passport, but failed to disclose his Canadian passport. Applicant disclosed in his e-QIP 
that he was a dual citizen of the United States and Canada that he owned property in 
Canada, and the periods during which he resided in Canada. Moreover, Applicant’s 
Canadian passport expired on July 24, 2003, prior to him filling out his e-QIP (GE 3). 
 
The government further alleged Applicant falsified his 2006 e-QIP because he 
failed to disclose in his answer to question 18, that he had traveled to Israel and 
Canada in multiple occasions. Applicant disclosed that he travelled to Jordan and Israel 
in 2004, but failed to disclose he travelled to Canada once or twice every month to visit 
his family, and that he travelled to Israel six times after 2000, including three trips since 
2004. 
 
Applicant admitted he failed to disclose the number of times he travelled to 
Canada and Israel, but credibly explained he misunderstood the question, and that his 
omissions were an innocent mistake. Considering the record evidence as a whole (the 
e-QIP, his answer to the DOHA interrogatories, and his demeanor and testimony), I find 
Applicant’s omission were not made with the intent to mislead the government or falsify 
his security clearance application. He disclosed almost all the information requested in 
his answers to other e-QIP questions. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts. The government of Israel is a 
parliamentary democracy. The Israeli government generally respects the human rights 
of its citizens, but there are some issues with respect to treatment of Palestinian 
detainees, conditions in some detention and interrogation facilities, and discrimination 
against Israel’s Arab citizens. Since 1948, the United States and Israel have developed 
a close friendship based on common democratic values, religious affinities, and security 
interests. Israel has a diversified, technologically advanced economy and the United 
States is Israel’s largest trading partner. Since 1976, Israel has been the largest 
recipient of U.S. foreign aid. The two countries also have very close security relations.   
 
 U.S. - Israeli bilateral relations are multidimensional and complex. Israel has 
given a high priority to gaining wide acceptance as a sovereign state and to ending 
hostilities with Arab forces. Israel and the United States participate in joint military 
planning and combined exercises, and have collaborated on military research and 
weapons development. Commitment to Israel’s security and well being has been a 
cornerstone of U.S. policy in the Middle East since Israel’s creation in 1948, and the two 
countries are bound closely by historic and cultural ties as well as mutual interests. 
 
 Notwithstanding, there are several issues of concern regarding U.S. relations 
with Israel. These include Israel’s military sales to China, inadequate Israeli protection 
of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-related cases. There are several cases of 
U.S. citizens convicted of selling, or attempting to sell, classified documents to Israeli 
Embassy officials, as well as cases of Israeli nationals indicted for espionage.   
 
 Israel is one of the most active collectors of proprietary information. Israeli 
military officers have been implicated in this type of technology collection in the United 
States. There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, 
of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Israel. 
 
 The theft of sensitive and proprietary information threatens U.S. national security 
in both military and economic terms, and it reveals the intelligence-gathering capabilities 
of foreign governments and foreign companies. Industrial espionage is intelligence-
gathering “conducted by a foreign government or by a foreign company with direct 
assistance of a foreign government against a private U.S. company for the purpose of 
obtaining commercial secrets.” Industrial espionage is not limited to targeting 
commercial secrets of a merely civilian nature, but rather can include the targeting of 
commercial secrets that have military applications, sensitive technology that can be 
used to harm the United States and its allies, and classified information.  
 
 I also take administrative notice of the following facts. Palestine is a territory, 
created following World War I, as a result of a British mandate. The territory included 
land that is within the current borders of Israel, Jordan, the West Bank and the Gaza 
strip. In 1948, the British withdrew from the Palestinian territory and Jews proclaimed an 
independent State of Israel. Escalating violence forced Arabs living in the Palestinian 
territory to move to the Egyptian controlled Gaza Strip, the Jordanian ruled West Bank, 
Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon.  
 
8 
 
 
                                                     
 In the January 2006 Palestinian legislative election, an opposition political party, 
Hamas, formed a government without Fatah, the former ruling party within Palestine 
and the largest faction within the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Hamas 
combines Palestinian nationalism with Islamic fundamentalism. The group is committed 
to the destruction of Israel and the establishment of an Islamic state in all of historic 
Palestine. It has waged an intermittent terrorist campaign to undermine the peace 
process and has carried out hundred of terrorist attacks since 1993. The United States 
has designated Hamas and six other Palestinian groups as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations.  
 
 In February 2007, Hamas and Fatah signed an agreement to form a national 
unity government. However, in June 2007, factional fighting broke out and Hamas took 
complete control of the Gaza strip. Fatah retained control over the West Bank. There 
are approximately 60,000 Palestinian Christians living in the occupied territories, about 
2% of the population. Palestinian Christians once made up to some 8-10% if the 
Palestinian Arabs, but their numbers have been shrinking as a disproportionate number 
of them have fled for economic or security reasons. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.5  
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”6 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
5  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
6  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
9 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
Under AG ¶ 10(a)(1) Applicant may be disqualified for the “exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the 
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession 
of a current foreign passport; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits;” and (4) voting in a foreign election.  
 
Applicant renewed and used his Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. As 
of the day of his hearing, he possessed a valid Israeli passport that will not expire until 
2013. He and his family members accepted educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, and or similar benefits from the Canadian government, and he voted in 
Canadian elections after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1), (3), and (4) apply. 
 
 
10 
 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Applicant’s security concerns arose, in part, out of the exercise of his dual 
citizenships with Israeli and Canadian citizenships. In March 2008, Applicant stated he 
was willing to surrender his Israeli and Canadian passports. At his hearing, Applicant 
expressed a willingness to renounce his dual citizenships with Canada and Israel. 
Applicant has travelled to Israel six times since 2000, including three times after 2003 to 
visit family members in Israel. In all his travels to Israel, he either used his Canadian or 
Israeli passport in preference to his U.S. passport. As of his hearing day, Applicant 
enjoyed all the privileges and rights of Israeli citizens, including the possession of a 
valid Israeli passport in preference of his U.S. passport. AG ¶ 11(a) does not apply. 
 
 The security concerns raised by Applicant’s possession and use of his Canadian 
passport are diminished because the passport expired and Applicant has no intention to 
renew it. Applicant and his family received Canadian government benefits after he 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen (i.e., he voted in Canadian elections, his children 
attended Canadian schools, he owned property and interest in a business). Applicant’s 
actions showed he exercised his Canadian citizenship and preference for Canada.  
 
 Applicant moved to the United States in 2002, after separating from his wife. He 
sold his interest in the marital home to his older son and purchased his own home in the 
United States with his younger son. He has made the United States his home. His 
younger son and daughter live in the United States, and his older son intends to 
establish himself in the United States after he completes his employment contract 
abroad. Applicant intends to retire in the United States and his financial and economic 
 
11 
 
 
ties are in the United States. Applicant’s behavior since 2002 mitigates the security 
concerns raised by his past exercise of his Canadian citizenship. His actions no longer 
indicate a preference for Canada over the United States. These facts warrant partial 
application of foreign preference mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e). AG ¶¶ 
11(a), 11(c), and 11(d) are not applicable.  
 
 Notwithstanding, he failed to mitigate the foreign preference security concerns 
raised by his exercise of his Israeli citizenship after he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He failed to surrender his Israeli passport and has not mitigated the passport 
specific issues.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign own or foreign operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 
12 
 
 
                                                     
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.7 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with his older son, who is an Israeli citizen (as 
well as a Canadian and U.S. citizen), residing in the Palestinian occupied territory. The 
closeness of the relationship is shown by Applicant’s frequent telephone, e-mail, and 
personal contacts with his son, and the fact that his son travelled back to the United 
States to assist his father during the hearing.  
 
This contact creates a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because 
there is always the possibility that Israeli or Palestinian agents and terrorists operating 
in Palestine may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified U.S. information. 
Israel is one of the most active collectors of sensitive and proprietary information from 
the United States. Israeli military officers have been implicated in the collection in the 
United States of classified and proprietary technology. There have been cases involving 
the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to 
Israel.  
 
Hamas and five other designated terrorist organizations operate within the 
Palestinian occupied territory, and Hamas controls part of the territory. This creates a 
dangerous situation for all American and American interests within the territory. 
Applicant’s son living and working in the Palestinian occupied territory creates a 
potential conflict of interest because his relationship is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about Applicant’s desire to help his son by providing sensitive or 
classified information.  
 
Applicant and his ex-wife own a home in Canada, which is valued at 
approximately $410,000.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  Six Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
7  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
13 
 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U. 
S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply and do not mitigate the security concerns 
raised. Appellant did not establish it is unlikely he will be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of his son and the interests of the U.S. His frequent 
contact and close relationship with his son could potentially force him to choose 
between the United States, Israel, and the Palestinian interests.  
 
Considering Israel’s aggressive posture in the collection of sensitive and 
proprietary information in the United States, Applicant’s close relationship with his son 
creates a higher risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion by the 
Israeli government.  
 
The nature of the political situation in the Palestinian occupied territory and the 
relationship of the Palestinian authority with the United States are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that Applicant’s son is vulnerable to government or terrorist coercion. The 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has 
an authoritarian government, or the government (in this case, the controlling Palestinian 
organization) has interests inimical to the United States.  
 
Hamas and five over terrorist designated organizations operate freely within the 
Palestinian territory, and the Palestinian authority has no control over certain areas of 
the territory. These circumstances raise the burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
 
14 
 
 
demonstrate that his son living and working in that area does not pose a security risk 
and that Applicant will not be placed into a position of being forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and his family members.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient 
relationship and loyalty to the United States and should be given credit for his 
connections to the United States. He has lived in the United States of and off for 
approximately 28 years. He has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for around 10 years. His 
sons are U.S. citizens and his daughter is applying for U.S. citizenship. Both his 
younger son and daughter live in the United States. He has worked hard and is 
successful in his trade. However, when his favorable information is balanced against his 
contact with his older son, there remains a potential conflict of interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) does not mitigate the security concerns raised because Applicant has 
significant contacts with his son who is a resident of the Palestinian occupied territory 
and a citizen of Israel. Such contact creates a risk of foreign exploitation because of the 
Israeli government’s active collection of sensitive U.S. economic, industrial, and 
proprietary information. He also has significant contacts to Israel. Moreover, there is a 
higher risk is created by Hamas and other terrorist organization operating in the 
Palestinian occupied territory. 
 
Available information sustains a conclusion that there is a risk that the Israeli 
government, or terrorist within the Palestinian occupied territory may attempt to exploit 
Applicant directly, or by exploiting Applicant’s son. Applicant’s situation creates a 
potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligations to protect sensitive 
information and his desire/obligation to help himself, or his family were they under 
exploitation by a foreign interest. 
 
I considered Applicant’s extensive contacts with his immediate and extended 
family members who are citizens and residents of Canada, and some of them who are 
citizens of Canada but U.S. residents. I also considered that Applicant is still in the title 
of the marital home he purchased with his ex-wife, that his passport expired and he 
does not intend to renew it, and his expressed willingness to surrender his Canadian 
citizenship. Applicant credibly testified that 50% of the interest in the marital home was 
awarded to his wife as a result of their divorce. He sold his 50% interest in the property 
to his older son. A new property title excluding Applicant will be issued when the 
mortgage is paid off in 2009. He has no other property of financial interests in Canada.  
 
In light of Canada’s democratic form of government, its stable political situation, 
and the historically strong friendly relationship between Canada and the United States, 
it is not likely that Applicant or his family will be targeted by the Canadian government to 
obtain U.S. protected information. Applicant mitigated the Canada foreign preference 
security concerns.  
 
 
15 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG ¶ 15.  
 
Applicant omitted in his answers to his security clearance application that he was 
a citizen of Israel, that he had an active Canadian passport, and that he had traveled to 
Israel and Canada in multiple occasions. He failed to provide information that was 
material to making an informed security decision. Notwithstanding, I find Applicant’s 
omissions were not deliberate or with the intent to mislead the government.  
 
The e-QIP shows Applicant disclosed he was born in Israel, that he had foreign 
connections and contacts with Israel, and that he had an active Israeli passport. 
Applicant also disclosed he was a dual citizen of the United States and Canada, that he 
owned property in Canada, and that he resided in Canada for many years. Moreover, 
Applicant’s Canadian passport expired on July 24, 2003, prior to him filling out his e-
QIP, and there is no evidence to show he renewed his Canadian passport.  
 
Applicant credibly explained he misunderstood the question, and that his 
omissions were an innocent mistake. This is corroborated by his disclosure of almost all 
the omitted information in other sections of the e-QIP. Considering the record evidence 
as a whole (the e-QIP, his answer to the DOHA interrogatories, and his demeanor and 
testimony), I find Applicant’s omissions were not deliberate, or made with the intent to 
conceal information, or to falsify his security clearance application. None of the 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
16 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
On balance, Applicant’s favorable information is summarized as follows. 
Applicant is a loyal and proud American with an excellent work reputation. He has lived 
in the United States, on and off, for 28 years and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for 
10 years. When he became a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. 
Two of his children are also naturalized U.S. citizens. His daughter lives in the United 
States and is in the process of applying for U.S. citizenship. Applicant and his sons 
credibly testified that they intend to permanently live in the United States. Applicant 
intents to retire in the United States, and all his financial interests, including his job are 
in the United States. He also expressed his intention to surrender his Canadian and 
Israeli citizenships to avoid any possible conflict of interest. 
 
There is no evidence he has ever taken any action which could cause potential 
harm to the United States, or that he lacks honesty and integrity. He has the respect 
and trust of his references who recommended him for a security clearance without 
reservations. 
 
On the other hand, there are circumstances that weigh against Applicant in the 
whole person analysis: Applicant did not surrender his valid Israeli passport; his 
frequent use of his Canadian and Israeli passports, in preference of his U.S. passport, 
to travel to Israel; Israel’s aggressive pursuit of sensitive or protected U.S. information; 
his oldest son living in the Palestinian occupied territories; and Applicant’s significant 
contacts with Israel and Israeli citizens.  
 
These circumstances create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Israeli agents or terrorist in the occupied 
territory may attempt to use Applicant’s son to obtain information about the United 
States. “Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990).  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns arising from his 
possession of a valid Israeli passport and his relationship and contacts with Israeli 
citizens and residents. He mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
17 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c;    Against Applicant 
    and 1.e and 1.f: 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a;     Against Applicant 
    and 2.g-2.j: 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.b-2.f;    For Applicant 
    and 2.k: 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
