1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------, ------- ------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-17632
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant had some delinquent debts incurred more than four years ago that he
was prevented from repaying by unforeseen medical problems. All these debts were
finally discharged in bankruptcy in October 2008. He is now solvent and debt-free.
Based upon a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on May 10, 2007. On May 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 28, 2008. He answered the
SOR in writing on June 9, 2008, and originally requested a decision without a hearing
before an administrative judge. After preliminary discussions with Department Counsel,
he changed his mind and requested a hearing. (Tr. at 17-20.) Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on October 27, 2008, and DOHA assigned the case to me on
October 29, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 2, 2008, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on January 7, 2009. Department Counsel offered Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on
his own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were also
admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s and Department Counsel’s joint
request to leave the record open until January 14, 2009, to permit Applicant to obtain
and submit additional documents concerning his bankruptcy. This evidence was
submitted and admitted as AE D, without objection by Department Counsel, on January
8, 2009. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where he has worked
for several months as an employee and three preceding years as a subcontractor
employee.  He is a stock clerk. He was married from 1974 to 1979, and again from 1984
to 1989, and lived in a common-law relationship with a third woman from about 1994 to
2002. He has no children. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted to all of the allegations
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k, describing 11 delinquent debts totaling $51,367. Those
admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
Applicant moved to his current state of residence in 2004, in order to reduce his
living expenses by moving in with his brother and sister-in-law. He had terminated an
eight-year living arrangement with a woman in another state about a year earlier
because, contrary to his wishes, she continued incurring debts they could not afford to
repay with their combined income. All of the SOR-listed debts date from this period in
Applicant’s life. Upon their separation, he agreed to assume responsibility for their debts
because she could not afford to repay any of them and he thought that he could. The
debts at that time were considerably less, having since increased through the addition
of interest and collection agency fees. (Tr. at 25-26, 41-42, 75-78.)
Shortly after Applicant moved in with his brother and was starting a job, he was
diagnosed with a disabling disease that required him to undergo a hip replacement. He
had to apply for state assistance to afford the surgery, which was eventually approved.
He has recently recovered fully from this medical condition, but it prevented him from
working for about 14 months. Once he found work again, he contacted his creditors,
and paid a few of his smaller debts. The creditors holding the larger debts were
unwilling to negotiate an affordable repayment plan, however, so he finally sought
counsel from an attorney who recommended that he file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief.
(Tr at 25-26, 42-45, 57-61.)
3
Applicant’s bankruptcy case was filed in July 2008, and the court ordered all of
his dischargeable debts discharged under Chapter 7 in October 2008. (AE A; AE D.)
Applicant was not certain, and it could not be determined by examination of the credit
reports submitted into evidence, whether the two debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i
were different debts or duplicate listings of the same underlying debt by two collection
agencies. Just in case they did reflect different debts, both were listed in Schedule F of
his bankruptcy filing (AE D), which listed a total of $54,795 of dischargeable, unsecured
debt. Comparing this schedule with the SOR showed that all the debts except the one
listed in SOR ¶ 1.g, a $79 cell phone bill, were discharged in the bankruptcy. The
evidence submitted by Department Counsel shows that this $79 debt was reported as
being paid in full to a successor credit agency in May 2007. (Compare GE 4 at 4; GE 5
at 7; GE 6 at 8, 12; no longer listed on GE 9 -11.) Thus, all Applicant’s of debts have
been finally resolved. 
Applicant submitted letters from two supervisors who have worked with him in his
present position over the past several years. They both praised his good character,
loyalty, and dedication to his work. His testimony during the hearing was forthright and
credible. He displayed a thorough knowledge and reasonable approach to his current
situation. He lives modestly and has incurred no new debt since moving to live with his
brother. He has no outstanding loans and no credit cards. He has established a
retirement savings program with his monthly surplus earnings now that his outstanding
debt has been fully resolved. (AE B; AE C; Tr. at 61-65, 73-75.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Applicant’s admissions and the Government evidence raised two of these
potentially disqualifying conditions: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” There was neither any allegation nor
proof of frivolous or irresponsible spending on Applicant’s part. Nor was there any
evidence of gambling, drug abuse, alcoholism, tax evasion, or illegal financial practices.
Simply, Applicant assumed responsibility for the joint debts largely incurred by his
partner in a long-term relationship that ended because of her continued irresponsible
financial behavior and his decision to no longer condone it. He was willing to satisfy
5
those debts, but unable to do so because of a medical situation that he has since
resolved. This caused him to undergo a period of unemployment, however, during
which the larger debts grew to the point that bankruptcy became his only option. He
availed himself of that lawful manner to resolve his delinquent indebtedness, and
incurred no new debts since returning to work in late 2005. Accordingly, AG ¶ 19(a) no
longer applies to Applicant, leaving only potential concern under AG ¶ 19(c). He is no
longer at any risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds, since his income
more than meets his regular living expenses, and all of his former debt has been
lawfully discharged. Only if his history of not meeting financial obligations indicates poor
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations should
that history support present security concerns.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from a
history of unpaid debt. Since Applicant did not dispute the legitimacy of any SOR-listed
debt, the four potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s formerly delinquent debts all arose more than four years ago, as a
result of a relationship he terminated in order to get the situation under control. He has
taken all possible measures to minimize his regular living expenses and maintain gainful
employment to remain self-supporting. His original plan to pay off the debts was
derailed by an unforeseeable medical condition requiring major surgery and resulting in
14 months of unemployment. By the time he could resume work and contacted his
creditors about repayment arrangements, they were not interested except on terms
beyond his possible means. Accordingly, he sought and received resolution of all his
outstanding debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceedings, discharged in October
2008. These actions by Applicant establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), since the debts
arose long ago and under circumstances he terminated to resolve them, reflecting his
good judgment and trustworthiness. The debt resolution was delayed, and ultimately
prevented, by medical circumstances beyond his control, not through any irresponsible
6
conduct on his part. He acted as responsibly as the circumstances permitted,
establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant sought the counsel of an attorney, and followed the advice given that
filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief was his best option, given his age and financial
circumstances. He saved enough money to do so, and his debts were successfully and
fully resolved through bankruptcy effective October 2008. This establishes mitigation
and resolves any remaining security concern under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves formerly delinquent debts for which he accepted responsibility, with
every intent to pay them, after terminating the relationship with the woman on whose
behalf they were largely incurred. An unforeseen major medical problem prevented him
from earning the money to repay these debts, after he moved in with his brother’s family
to minimize living expenses so he could do so. He then paid off several of the smaller
debts, but was unable to negotiate repayment programs with the creditors to whom he
owed larger amounts including significant charges for interest and collection fees. He
sought and followed the advice of an attorney to resolve his situation lawfully through
bankruptcy. He has incurred no new debt for almost five years, and is living in a frugal
and solvent manner on his current income. There is little likelihood of recurrence of this
problem, based on his past responses to such troubles and his current desire to avoid
any repeat of them. His bankruptcy discharge has completely alleviated any potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress from his former debt situation. 
7
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to fully mitigate reliability
and trustworthiness security concerns arising from his former failure to satisfy debts,
and brief history of not meeting financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves
no doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For
all these reasons, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his
financial considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
