 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-16815 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on March 13, 2006. On August 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 22, 2008. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 31, 2008. On January 6, 2009, the 
case was assigned to another administrative judge, and on January 26, 2009, the 
case was reassigned to me due to caseload considerations. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on January 27, 2009, scheduling the hearing for February 5, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Government submitted a List of Government Exhibits, 
Exhibit (Ex.) I. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
received without objection, and testified on his own behalf. The Applicant submitted a 
List of Applicant Exhibits (Ex. II), and a matrix outlining his debts and their status (Ex. 
III).  
 
I held the record open until February 27, 2009 to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE E through K, which were forwarded by Department Counsel by letter dated March 
9, 2009 without objection (Ex. IV), and received. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 13, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.d., 1.f., 1.g., 1.i., 1.k., 1.l., 1.o. – 1.x., and 
denied 1.e., 1.h., 1.j., 1.m., and 1.n. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old program manager, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since October 1986. Tr. 19-20, GE 1. Applicant has been 
employed in defense-related work for over 25 years and during those 25 years, he has 
successfully held a secret security clearance. His access to classified material was 
suspended as a result of these proceedings. Tr. 17-20, 67-68, GE 1, AE F.  
 
Applicant graduated from college in December 2002 with a Bachelor of Science 
degree in mechanical engineering. GE 1. He was previously married from August 
1984 to May 1986 (estimated). That marriage ended by divorce. GE 1. He has a 24-
year-old son from his first marriage, who is independent and does not rely on 
Applicant for support. Tr. 16-17. Applicant remarried in July 1993, and has three 
daughters, ages 14, 11, and 10. GE 1, Tr. 16. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his March 2006 e-QIP, his August 2008, November 2007, and 
April 2006 credit bureau reports, his undated Response to DOHA Interrogatories, and 
his August 2006 and April 2007 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interviews. 
GE 1 through 7.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 24 separate line items, which totaled approximately 
$33,280. As noted, Applicant admitted to 19 debts, and denied five debts. The five 
denied debts total approximately $4,000, leaving a total of admitted debts at 
approximately $29,280. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. is a duplicate of the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.p. leaving 23 debts totaling approximately $32,000. Tr. 8-9, Ex. III. 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to “poor financial judgment” that 
began in the “late 1990’s and continued through the early 2000’s.” Tr. 52-54, 66-67. 
Since his SOR was issued and after evaluating his options to include bankruptcy, 
Applicant retained the services of a credit counseling service on January 29, 2009. 
Included in this service is debt consolidation and financial counseling. On March 8, 
2009, Applicant began paying the credit counseling service by direct debit with an 
initial payment of $1,097.00. Successive monthly payments will be $1,052.00 and will 
continue for 38 months. The monthly fee Applicant pays to his credit counseling 
service is applied to the company’s fee and/or debt principle. Documentation of same 
was provided. Tr. 54-56, 67, AE D.  
 
In conjunction with the financial counseling Applicant received from his credit 
counseling service, he was able to develop a viable budget and a “Lead Action Plan.” 
AE D. In addition to the action discussed supra, Applicant will be removing his children 
from private school to save tuition money, and is borrowing from his 401(k) retirement 
account to apply to his debts. Post-hearing Applicant provided updates on his 
progress in attaining financial stability to include documentation that he has satisfied 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j. and 1.u. Ex. IV, AE E – AE K. 
 
Applicant provided a recent performance review, which documents above 
average work performance. He has enjoyed a career marked by regular promotions 
and documented achievements/accomplishments in support of the defense industry. 
AE B. Of note, he has been recognized in the development of numerous tank 
ammunition and artillery programs and holds a U.S. patent for developing a classified 
projectile. AE F. Applicant is active in his community and does volunteer work with 
Junior Achievement, local food kitchen, local organization dedicated to improving the 
lives of people with intellectual and other disabilities and their families, and serves as 
a youth minister. AE F. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG 18, the Government’s concern is: 
 
“[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 The Government established that Applicant owed substantial debt as reflected 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.x. through his admissions and evidence presented. At the time the 
SOR was issued in August 2008, Applicant owed a number of debts. 
 
Under AG ¶ 19, two disqualifying conditions raise a security concern: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness stems from his admitted financial mismanagement 
that began in the late 1990s and continued into the early 2000s. Once overextended, it 
became increasingly difficult for Applicant to remain current and he began a financial 
tailspin.  
 
Having recognized the seriousness of his situation, Applicant reviewed his 
options to include bankruptcy and chose to retain the services of a credit counseling 
service. He recently entered into an agreement with that service to whom he pays a 
monthly fee by direct debit, and has sought financial counseling also offered by the 
same service. He submitted post-hearing updates on his financial progress. He has 
established a credible budget. All indicators point to an individual who has taken this 
process quite seriously and taken what appears to be all reasonable steps to correct 
his financial situation. What is different now as opposed to before is he has the 
means, tools and resolve to achieve financial responsibility. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20, there are two potentially mitigating conditions: 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies because Applicant sought financial counseling. While 
paying down his debts, he continues to explore strategies to improve his financial 
situation. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies because Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. In short, Applicant has made 
substantial progress in turning his financial situation around. He has established a 
viable budget, which shows a net remainder after his monthly bills are paid. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I also gave 
considerable weight to his years of service in the defense industry, his 25 plus years 
of successfully holding a secret clearance, his recognition in the development of 
numerous tank ammunition and artillery programs, and developing a patent for a 
classified projective. He also is dedicated to his family and contributes substantially to 
his community through his volunteer work. In reaching this conclusion, the whole 
person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does support a 
favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.x.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
