1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14962
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Brian J. Di Stefano, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on March 27, 2006. On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns
under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 7, 2008. She answered the
SOR in writing through counsel on July 21, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. That burden has two components. First, the
government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern. See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 2-5 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting in part).
GE 1; AE B - AE L; Tr. 53-56.2
2
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 28, 2008. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 21, 2008, and I received the case
assignment on September 4, 2008. DOHA issued the first notice of hearing on October
1, 2008 for a hearing date of October 16, 2008. Applicant’s counsel requested a
continuance on October 14, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request for a delay by Order
dated October 14, 2008. DOHA issued a second hearing notice on November 10, 2008
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 9, 2008. The government
offered 20 exhibits (GE) 1 through 20, which were received and admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant and one witness testified on her behalf. She submitted 13
exhibits (AE) A through M, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 30, 2008. I
held the record open until December 31, 2008, for Applicant to submit additional matters
and until January 14, 2009 for Department Counsel to brief several legal issues. On
December 30, 2008, Applicant submitted three additional documents through counsel,
which were marked as AE N through P and admitted without objection. Department
Counsel submitted a brief on January 14, 2009. Applicant did not file a response, which
was due January 26, 2009. The record closed on January 26, 2009.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated July 21, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.m of the SOR. She denied the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1,a-1.c, 1.e, 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, and 2.a-2.d of the SOR.   1
Applicant, who is 60-years-old, works for a Department of Defense contractor.
She began her current employment in January 2005 as an administrative assistant. She
now works as an operations analyst. Her supervisors and co-workers describe her as
very professional, responsible and dependable. She performs her work duties very well
and all recommend her for a clearance. Her references praise her work skills and her
ability to get the job done. She has received on-the-spot awards and other
commendations from her employer.  2
Applicant married her husband 42 years ago at the age of 18. They have seven
children, ages 18 to 42. For the last 42 years, her husband has been self-employed,
working as a contractor in the construction industry. During these years, his work and
income have fluctuated with the peaks and valleys of the economy. For many years,
GE 1, at 17; Tr. 32.3
Tr. 20-21, 27-28.4
Id . at 19-20, 27. Because her mother died in the state in which Applicant lived and owned a house in another5
state, the resolution of Applicant’s mother’s estate was much more complicated. Applicant attempted twice
to probate her mother’s will without success. Tr. 65-67.
GE 1; Tr. 24.6
Tr. 32, 102, 110.7
3
Applicant remained at home with her children, whom she home schooled. From 1987
until 2002, she lived on a 30-acre farm in a rural area of the country.3
In 1997, after Applicant’s stepfather died, she moved her seriously ill mother to
her farm so that she could care for her. Her mother suffered from multiple medical
problems and died five months later on October 31, 1997. Her mother’s medical care
resulted in numerous expenses, most of which Applicant charged on her mother’s credit
card pursuant to power of attorney, and for which her mother’s estate lacked the cash to
pay. Applicant paid these bills for several years until she could not longer pay her
mother’s debts.  4
Upon her mother’s death and pursuant to her mother’s will, Applicant, an only
child, and her seven children inherited her parent’s home in another state. Applicant
also received $3,000 from a life insurance policy. Applicant did not probate her mother’s
will, although she twice attempted to do so.5
In 1999, Applicant and her husband began living apart. She remained on their
farm with some of their children and he moved into her parents’ home in another state,
continuing to work in the construction industry as a contractor. Over the next three
years, she worked sporadically in the restaurant industry. In 2002, she moved into her
parents’ home with her husband and began working, initially part-time.6
In 2002, Applicant’s husband, who is now 62 years old, suffered a heart attack.
Since his heart attack, the doctor’s have placed stints in his arteries. In 2007, he was
hospitalized for bleeding ulcers. He also suffers from diabetes. His ability to work is
more limited because of his health problems.7
Applicant’s tax returns reflect she and her husband’s gross income as follows:
$48,087 for 1999, $10,423 for 2001, $2,432 for 2002, $14,890 for 2003, $18,565 for
2004, $30,723 for 2005, $47,000 for 2006, and $26,126 for 2007. After moving into her
parents’ home, Applicant found it difficult to pay household expenses on two properties
with her part-time job and her husband’s fluctuating income. She could not pay the
property taxes on her parents’ home. As a consequence, the State sold the house. The
holder of the tax sale certificate moved to foreclose on the property in 2003. Because
she wanted to retain possession of her parents’ home, Applicant sought legal counsel.
GE 2 (Attachments including letter from attorney); GE 5 (bankruptcy petition); AE P (tax returns); Tr. 24, 29-8
20.
GE 5 (Bankruptcy petition).9
GE 2 (Interrogatories and answer with attachments, including docket sheet for Applicant’s bankruptcy case);10
GE 3.
GE 2, attachments; Tr. 66.11
4
Her attorney advised her to file bankruptcy and to probate her mother’s will. She hired
an attorney to handle the bankruptcy action and another attorney to resolve her
mother’s estate issues. On the recommendation of legal counsel, in April 2004,
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition for the sole purpose of stopping the
foreclosure on her parents’ house. 8
The Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition listed the farm, and her parents’ house as
Applicant’s real property with a total value of $37,500, and personal property, including
an old car, with a total value of $1,750. Applicant identified her secured creditors as the
tax certificate holder, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the holder of the car note,
and her unsecured creditors as several credit card holders. One judgment was listed.
Several of the debts listed are from her mother’s estate.9
The bankruptcy court docket sheet reveals that creditors were notified and that
only one creditor responded. Following a hearing in June 2004, Applicant developed a
repayment plan, which required her to pay $95 for four months, and then $403 a month
for 56 months. After a hearing in August 2004, the court confirmed the plan in an Order
dated October 21, 2004. The bankruptcy court records indicate Applicant made some
payments under the plan. In June 2006, through counsel, Applicant filed a motion to
acquire post-petition debt. One month later, a certificate of consent related to this
motion was filed with the court. On July 27, 2006, the bankruptcy court entered an order
approving the settlement and granting the relief requested by the above motion. Three
months later the bankruptcy trustee filed a motion to dismiss Applicant’s Chapter 13
case, which the court granted on November 1, 2006. The bankruptcy court did not
dismiss Applicant’s Chapter 13 petition for Applicant’s failure to appear for the creditors
meeting or for failure to comply with terms of her repayment plan. Rather, the court
dismissed this case based on an approved settlement agreement. The terms of the
settlement agreement have not been submitted into this record.10
Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney advised that he recommended Applicant file a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy to stop the foreclosure on her parents’ home and to place this
property in her mother’s estate, goals which were achieved. Through appropriate legal
process, Applicant’s parents’ home became part of her mother’s estate and title
transferred to Applicant as her mother’s sole heir, subsequent to Applicant’s children
agreement to relinquish any rights to the property.11
GE 2 at 25.12
GE 2, attachments; Tr. 54, 85-89.13
AE A; Tr. 84.14
5
Applicant applied for a $120,000 mortgage in 2006, which was approved. To
actually receive her funds, the mortgagor required Applicant to dismiss her Chapter 13
bankruptcy, which the court did on November 1, 2006. Applicant proceeded to
settlement on December 15, 2006. The settlement funds included disbursements to pay
taxes, including the $16,409 IRS lien, the judgment listed in her bankruptcy, attorneys’
fees, and $4,500 to an individual Applicant believes resolved the remaining credit card
debt in the bankruptcy. Her attorney advised that the bankruptcy included
miscellaneous credit card debt he believed was owed by Applicant’s mother’s estate
and that since the creditors for the bank credit cards did not file a claim, it was
unnecessary to pay the claims. He also advised that all claims were paid, although full
documentation on this issue is not of record.   12
Applicant’s current annual income is $63,150. Her gross monthly income is
approximately $5,250 and her net income is approximately $3,400 a month. Because of
his health and the slowdown in the economy, especially the construction industry,
Applicant’s husband contributed $400 to the family income in December 2008, although
this amount has been much higher in other months. She depends on her husband’s
monthly contribution to pay household expenses. Her fixed monthly household
expenses include $1,429 for the mortgage, $400 for electric, $40 for water, $96 for TV
hookup, $42 for the internet, and $800 for car insurance. Other household expenses
average around $1,000. These expenses can fluctuate and include food, gasoline, and
miscellaneous expenses. Her February 2008 financial statement reflects that she
generally has sufficient income to meet her monthly expenses and her credit report
reflects that she does not use credit cards to pay monthly expenses. Two sons live with
her, but do not contribute significantly to the household expenses. Over the last 42
years, payment of household expenses has always been a challenge to Applicant and
her husband.13
In January 2008, Applicant wrote her mortgage holder advising that she had
encountered unexpected and high expenses. She asked for assistance based on
hardship. Her mortgage holder worked with her. As a result, her mortgage payments
actually decreased about $100 a month. To assure that she has sufficient money each
month to pay her mortgage, Applicant has a separate checking account for her
mortgage. Each pay check, she deposits one-half of the mortgage into this account.
Although she has been late, she pays the mortgage each month.  14
The SOR lists 13 debts which raised a security concern for Applicant. Two debts
belong to her mother’s estate, three debts are paid or resolved, two debts have a zero
balance, and tow debts are not Applicant’s. The debts are outlined in the following table:
Applicant admitted owing this debt in her response to the SOR because she had paid it for her mother for15
several years. Tr. 107-108.
GE 5 (Bankruptcy petition); GE 6 (Credit report, dated May 27, 2008); GE 7 (Credit report, dated October16
18, 2007); GE 8 (Credit report, dated April 7, 2006). 
6
SOR ¶ TYPE OF DEBT
CREDITOR
AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE
1.b. mortgage $3,030.00 Resolved; current AE A; AE O
1.c. judgment $   438.00 Not Applicant’s
debt
AE N
1.d credit card $   411.00 Zero balance GE 2 at 8-9; GE 6
1.e. judgment $1,543.00 Unpaid Tr. 34
1.f. judgment $   768.00 Husband’s
business debt (He
thought paid)
Tr. 35, 83, 117
1.g. credit card $   531.00 Zero balance GE 2 at 8-9; GE 6
1.h. federal tax lien $   769.00 Paid AE P
1.i. medical bill $   187.00 Unpaid Tr. 38
1.j. medical bill $   147.00 Unpaid Tr. 
1.k. car insurance $1,138.00 Paid, not verified Tr. 41
1.l. library fine $   173.00 Unpaid Tr. 107
1.m. credit card $1,363.00 Mother’s debt Tr. 42
1.n. credit card $7,518.00 Mother’s debt Tr. 42
Applicant denies having any credit cards in her name. She used her mother’s
credit cards to pay for her mother’s medical expenses. After her mother died, she paid
on these debts until she could no longer pay the monthly bills. The two credit cards
identified in SOR allegations 1.m. and 1.n are not listed on any of Applicant’s credit
reports.  These two debts are listed in her Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition with partial15
accounts numbers which do not match any account numbers on her credit reports.
Applicant’s credit reports contain the two credit card debts listed in SOR allegations 1.d
and 1.g. The reports show a zero balance and indicate the accounts have been
transferred or are a sold, charged off account. The credit reports do not reflect a new
holder of these accounts. In addition, the April 7, 2006 and May 27, 2008 credit reports
show a third account with the same creditor, noting that the account is part of a Chapter
13 wage earner’s plan and has a zero balance.   16
Tr. 40, 41, 107.17
Tr. 32, 39-40, 70-72, 112-113, 119.18
GE 1, at 1, 10-11.19
7
Applicant disagrees with the two debts listed in SOR allegations in 1.j and 1.l, but
she has not filed a formal complaint with the credit reporting companies or with the
creditors. She told the investigator she would pay these debts and again, at the hearing,
stated she would pay the debts under protest as she does not believe she owes the
money. Applicant continues to insure her cars with the insurer listed in SOR allegation
1.k. To keep her insurance, she needed to pay her overdue balance. She has not
provided documentation to show she does not owe this creditor.17
Applicant and her husband recently decided to sell the farm as they cannot afford
the cost of it. They have talked with a realtor, but have not signed a sales contract. They
still owe a small amount of money on the mortgage and the property taxes of $300 for
2008. The mortgagor is working with them. Applicant now manages the household
finances. Her husband did in the past and did not always keep her informed of the
status of the debts. As a self- employed individual, Applicant’s husband had no benefits,
such as medical insurance or disability insurance. In the past, she did the family taxes.
As a result of the tax lien for 1999 taxes, Applicant hired an accountant to review her tax
preparation and filings for every year from 1999 forward and to prepare and file her
yearly tax returns. She has always filed her federal and state tax returns. She and her
husband took their first vacation recently. They flew to a distant state to visit a
daughter.18
On March 27, 2006, Applicant completed her security clearance application. She
answered “yes” and listed one debt to the following question in her SF-86:19
Question 28a. Your Financial Delinquencies - 180 days
In the last 7 years, have you ever been over 180 days
delinquent on any debt(s)?
When she answered this question, Applicant listed one judgment, but did not list
the debts identified in SOR allegations 1.e, 1.f, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n. She also listed her
bankruptcy.
Applicant answered “no” to the following questions in her SF-86:
Question 28b. Your Financial Delinquencies - 90 Days
Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt?
Question 27c. Your Financial Record
Id. at 26-27, 29-31. SOR alleges she falsified this answer when she did not list her October 200020
misdemeanor charge for driving on a suspended operator’s license, her December 2000 charge for failure to
appear, and a January 2003 speeding ticket and driving on a suspended license. 
GEs 6-8; GEs 13-18; GE 20; AE P; Tr. 60-62, 107, 117.21
Tr. 105-106.22
8
In the last 7 years, have you had a lien placed against your
property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?
Concerning Section 23, Her Police Record, Applicant answered “no” to all six
questions about past arrests.20
Applicant strenuously denied that she deliberately omitted information on her
security clearance application. She has little memory of being arrested for anything. She
did not list any traffic offenses when answering Question 23. She believed the omitted
offenses were traffic misdemeanors, and did not think they constituted criminal conduct.
Each traffic offense fine was less than $150 although the fine plus court costs was $243
for a 2003 offense. She did not list the tax lien filed by the IRS. She acknowledged that
in 2003, she learned about the tax lien, which the IRS filed against her farm, not the
house in which she lived. She did not think about the lien, in part because the lien had
been filed against the farm and in part because she thought it was being resolved by
her bankruptcy. Two of the debts not listed are debts directly related to her mother, and
are debts which she does not consider hers. She did not know about the $768
judgment, as this debt belonged to her husband’s business. She listed the dental bill as
the judgment. She acknowledged the library fine to the investigator, which is not listed in
any of the credit reports or her bankruptcy petition. She did not list the 1995 judgment
for a medical bill. The most recent credit report and the Lexis-Nexis judgment
information sheets do not reflect that her tax liens were paid in January 2007 and
released by the IRS in April 2008. The credit reports also show a judgment which does
not belong to her and do not reflect the 1995 judgment.21
Applicant understood that if she lied on her security clearance application she
would lose her job. She denied she would lie and omit material facts purposely or
knowingly. She admits she made big mistakes in responding to the questions. She filled
out the form to the best of her abilities. In hindsight, she should have talked with
someone, “gotten” advice, and “gotten” a credit report before completing her application.
Applicant was not the best historian at the hearing, in part due to nervousness.22
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
After any decision, the losing party has a right to appeal the case to the Defense Office of Hearings and23
Appeals  Appeal Board. The Appeal Board’s review authority is limited to determining whether three tests are
met:
E3.1.32.1. The Administrative Judge’s findings of fact are supported by such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record. In making this review, the Appeal Board shall
give deference to the credibility determinations of the Administrative Judge:
E#.a.32.2. The Administrative Judge adhered to the procedures required by E.O. 10865
(enclosure 1) and this Directive: or
E3.1.32.3. The Administrative Judge’s rulings or conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.
The Appeal Board does not conduct a “de novo determination”, recognizing that its members have
no opportunity to observe witnesses and make credibility determinations. The Supreme Court in United States
v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667, 690 (1980) succinctly defined the phrase “de novo determination”:
[This legal term] has an accepted meaning in the law. It means an independent determination
of a controversy that accords no deference to any prior resolution of the same controversy.
Thus, in Renegotiation Board v. Bannercraft Clothing Co., 415 U.S. 1, 23 [(1974)], the Court
had occasion to define “de novo proceeding” as a review that was “unfettered by any
prejudice from the [prior] agency proceeding and free from any claim that the [agency’s]
determination is supported by substantial evidence.” In United States v. First City National
Bank, 386 U.S. 361,368 [(1967)], this Court observed that “review de novo” means “that the
court should make an independent determination of the issues” and should “not . . give any
9
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.  23
special weight to the [prior] determination of “the administrative agency.
(Internal footnotes omitted). See ISCR Case No. 07-10396 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2008) and ISCR Case No. 07-
07144 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 2008). In ISCR Case No. 05-01820 (App. Bd. Dec 14, 2006), the Appeal Board
criticized the administrative judge’s analysis, supporting grant of a clearance for a PRC-related Applicant, and
then decided the case itself. Judge W hite’s dissenting opinion cogently explains why credibility determinations
and ultimately the decision whether to grant or deny a clearance should be left to the judge who makes
witness credibility determinations. Id. at 5-7. See also ISCR Case No. 04-06386 at 10-11 (App. Bd. Aug. 25,
2006)(Harvey, J., dissenting) (discussing lim itations on Appeal Board’s authority to reverse hearing-level
judicial decisions and recommends remanding cases to resolve material, prejudicial error). Compliance with
the Agency’s rules and regulations is required. See United States ex. rel. Acardi  v. Shaughnessy, 347 U.S.
260, 268 (1954); Lopez v. FAA, 318 F.3d 242, 247-248 (D.C. Cir 2003); Nickelson  v. United States, 284 F.
Supp.2d 387, 390 (E.D. Va. 2003)( explaining standard of review).
10
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt and was unable to pay
11
some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ This mitigating
condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant and her
husband have always had financial problems because he was self-employed in the
construction industry, an industry where work is directly impacted by the ups and downs
of the economy. In 2002, her husband suffered a heart attack, which kept him out of
work for some time. When he did not work, her husband did not earn money. He did not
have disability income. In 2007, their household income was again adversely affected
by her husband’s health issues. As recommended by her attorney, Applicant filed
bankruptcy to stop the foreclosure on her parents’ house. During this process,
Applicant’s attorney probated her mother’s will and succeeded in transferring the house
from her mother’s estate into Applicant’s name. Once this occurred, Applicant applied
for, then qualified for a mortgage, which she received on the condition she dismiss the
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The bankruptcy court approved these actions and following the
dismissal of the bankruptcy, she closed on her mortgage in December 2006. She used
the proceeds from the mortgage to pay her federal tax lien, the lien holder on the house,
the judgment listed in her bankruptcy, and several other debts. When she experienced a
financial downturn and increased expenses in late 2007, she wrote the mortgagor,
asking for assistance. The mortgagor worked with her to resolve the problem. Currently,
she is working with the mortgagor on the farm loan and has made contact with a broker
to try and sell the farm in a poor real estate market. She has not ignored her debts,
rather she has taken action to resolve her issues to the best of her ability. She acted
responsibly under the circumstances. I find this potentially mitigating condition applies. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant has not received financial
counseling. However, many of the financial issues raised in the SOR have been
resolved and her current finances are being managed. She continues to have limited
funds because her husband is unable to work regularly for health reasons and because
his work has been directly impacted by the economy. She does not use credit cards to
finance a life style, but lives within her financial means. Her credit reports support her
Department counsel argues that because Applicant has not received credit counseling, AG ¶ 20(b) cannot24
be considered a mitigating condition. Applicant has not ignored her debts. She has taken responsibility for the
large debt issues and successfully resolved many of these debts. She continues to take responsibility for
resolving financial issues within her limited resources. Credit counseling would not necessarily resolve the
issues in this case. Moreover, most people receive some credit counseling in connection with bankruptcy.
Finally, her experiences resolving her debts has given her a good understanding of budgeting and other
financial fundmentals.
12
statement that she does not use credit to finance an unafforable lifestyle. This mitigating
condition has some applicability.24
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant began
working with her attorney in 2004 to resolve the financial issues caused by her mother’s
health and related financial problems. Upon the recommendation of her attorney, she
filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy to stop the foreclosure on her parents’ house. Two and
one-half years after filing her bankruptcy petition, the court dismissed her case after
approving a settlement which allowed Applicant to acquire a mortgage. Applicant used
the mortgage proceeds to pay debts, including paying $4,500 to an individual who was
resolving credit card debt. Her recent credit reports indicate that the two small credit
card debts have a zero balance. The credit reports indicate the accounts were sold or
transferred, but the credit reports do not show the debts are held by another creditor. I
find that since these debts were listed in her bankruptcy and she paid funds out of her
mortgage settlement for resolution of the credit card debts, these debts have been
resolved. As Applicant’s credit reports contain many inaccuracies concerning the
resolution of debt, this is a reasonable conclusion in light of all the information in the
record. This mitigating condition has partial applicability.
Although Applicant denies that she owes the two small debts identified in SOR
allegations 1.l and 1.j, she has not formally challenged the validity of these debts with
the creditor or the credit reporting companies. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. AG ¶
20(f) is not applicable in this case.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct::
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313325
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
Intention is defined as “a determination to act in a certain way” and intentional is defined as “done by26
intention or design”. Merriam-W ebster’s Collegiate Dictionary (11  ed. 2003).th
13
AG ¶ 16(a) describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
For this guideline to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
government established that Applicant omitted material facts from her e-QIP when she
answered “no” to Question 27c about the tax lien on her farm, to Question 23 about her
misdemeanor traffic offenses and Question 28b about her current financial
delinquencies. She answered “yes” to Question 28a, but did not list all her debts. This
information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a security
clearance and to her honesty. She strongly denies, however, that she deliberately
falsified her answers. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government
has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or
state of mind at the time the omission occurred.  For DC ¶ 16 (a) to apply, the25
government must establish that Applicant’s omission, concealment or falsification in her
answers was deliberate and intentional.26
Applicant reasonably believed that the traffic citations and arrests were motor
vehicle violations and not criminal conduct, a belief held by many other individuals in
this country. Applicant admits that she learned about the tax lien on the farm in 2003
and she listed the tax lien on her Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. This knowledge by
itself does not make her “no” answer intentional. She acknowledged her bankruptcy
filing and a judgment on her security clearance application. By providing this
information, Applicant was not attempting to hide her financial problems from the
government. Her disclosure highlights the financial issues as a potential security
concern. She, however, did not provide accurate and complete information, which does
not equal intentional falsification. There is no evidence in the record which indicates that
she decided not reveal this information. Given that she provided negative information
Even if I were to find the government had established disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a), mitigating condition27
AG 18(f), the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability would apply as the
allegation of intentional falsification was unsubstantiated.
14
about her finances, her failure to list the other negative financial information was not
deliberate and intentional. Guideline E is found in favor of Applicant.27
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both good
and bad. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the evidence of record, not
a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is shown. A determination
on an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance should not be made as punishment
for specific past conduct, but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence
of record to decide if a nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security
concern.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered all the facts and
evidence in the record, even if not specifically enumerated. Applicant married young
and has seven children. Over the last 42 years, she and her husband have struggled
financially. Because he worked in the construction industry, his income was directly
impacted by economic good times and bad times. Applicant and her husband have not
lived extravagantly. They struggled to pay ordinary living expense, such as housing and
food for their children. Their life continues to be adversely affected by the economy and
their ability to pay their usual living expenses is less than it would be in a strong
economy. They do not use credit cards to finance a lavish or extravagant lifestyle. They
do not have a car payment, only a mortgage payment. In the last five years, Applicant
has worked to resolve several large debts issues. Her employment is steady and
The other documentation of debt are printouts of information from Lexus-Nexus on judgments and liens.28
These documents are not the court record, but simply information inputted into a computer by some source.
The record does not contain any information which shows that this information is regularly updated. The court
record is the most reliable source as to the validity of the judgments and liens and the current status.
15
reliable, unlike her husband’s business. However, her income does not provide her with
sufficient money to pay all the bills. She still relies on her husband to provide income to
meet all the household expenses. Over the last five years, she has established a track
record for attacking and resolving her debt issues. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008). The fluctuation in her husband’s income places challenges on
her ability to always keep current on her bills and to meet unexpected expenses. She
does not ignore her bills, she pays them as soon as she can.
The credit reports of record reflect that she does not live beyond her financial
means. The credit reports and other documentation of debt owed contained inaccurate
information about her debt payments and actual debts.  A careful review of these28
records supports Applicant’s statements about her use of credit cards. The largest credit
card debt listed in the SOR (1.n) and another debt (1.m) are not shown as her personal
debts on any credit report. Because these debts are not listed as hers and her attorney
considered the debts an estate debt, her testimony that the debt belonged to her mother
is credible. She used the credit cards pursuant to the power of attorney her mother had
given her. Several smaller debts remain unpaid. These debts cannot be a source of
improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her debts
are paidBit is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to
hold a security clearance. While some debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise
security concerns. For many years, she and her husband have struggled to provide for
their large family. They have never resorted to illegal actions to do so. There is very little
likelihood she would do so in the future. I find that overall the positive factors in this
case outweigh the negative factors in this case.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations and personal conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
16
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
