 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17220 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her criminal conduct 
and alcohol use. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On October 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 11, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 25, 2009, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on March 17, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
 
2 
 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, called one 
witness, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were received without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 25, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has an 
associate’s degree. She is single and has a 19-year-old daughter.1  
 
 Applicant was cited in December 1992 for failure to maintain financial 
responsibility. She did not have car insurance at the time. She was fined $175. The 
charge is not listed on the FBI Identification Record submitted in evidence.2  
 
 Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct in July 1995. She was found 
guilty. She does not recall the circumstances surrounding the charge. There is no 
evidence as to what the sentence was for the charge.3  
 
 Applicant was charged with issuing a bad check in September 1996. She 
admitted that she wrote a check that was returned for nonsufficient funds. The court set 
up a payment plan for her to pay the check. She missed a payment and a bench 
warrant was issued. She was arrested for the bench warrant in February 1997. She 
made all the required payments and the bench warrant was withdrawn.4  
 
 Applicant was arrested in September 1996, and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI). Her blood alcohol was tested at .15%, and a short time later at 
.152%. Applicant pled guilty and was sentenced to probation for 18 months and a $500 
fine. She attended several Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings as part of her 
probation.5 
 
 Applicant and a friend were driving aboard a military installation in September 
2000. They were coming from a bar and the friend was driving her car. They both had 
been drinking and she had smoked marijuana. It is unclear if her friend had also 
smoked marijuana. They were stopped by the military police after he failed to stop at a 
stop sign. His driver’s license was suspended. The officer noted an alcohol smell 
coming from the vehicle and he was given a breath test, which measured .059%. The 
car was searched and marijuana was found. Applicant was charged with wrongful 
possession of marijuana. She pled guilty and was sentenced to probation for two years 
and a $1,000 fine. She was not required to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings but 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 40, 44; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 28; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 28-29; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 24, 29-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
for approximately a six month period, she voluntarily attended about eight to ten 
meetings. She has not used illegal drugs since she went to court for this incident in 
about January 2001. She did not stop drinking, which she did every day.6 
 
 Applicant was arrested in February 2007, and charged with driving while 
intoxicated, second offense. The police indicated that she almost hit the police car. The 
arrest was videotaped. Applicant’s blood alcohol was tested at .24%, which is far more 
than double the legal limit. She pled guilty and was sentenced to a $2,000 fine and her 
driver’s license was suspended for a year.7 
 
 Applicant continued to drink after the latest DWI. She admitted that she drank on 
a daily basis through about May 2007. She drank about six to eight beers a day and 
would drink to what she considered a level of intoxication, which was about 12 or more 
beers, about four to five times a month. She stated that after she stopped smoking 
marijuana, she essentially replaced the marijuana with alcohol. She provided 
inconsistent information about her current alcohol consumption. She told the 
background investigator in September 2007 that she had not drank alcohol since May 
2007, and she had no future plans to drink alcohol because of the problems it caused 
her and her family.8 She wrote in her response to the SOR: 
 
I have exercised very poor judgment in the past and have since matured 
and learned from those mistakes. Unfortunately, much of my poor 
judgment and bad choices were directly related to my alcohol intake. I 
never realized that I had a problem until 2007. The last arrest made me 
realize that I had to change that habit and I have. Since May 2007, I have 
had only a handful of drinks. I no longer drink every day, not even every 
weekend. I would estimate that I have drunk approximately a dozen times 
since then and never to the point of being drunk. I now know that alcohol 
is something that I must refrain from, and that all the positive changes I 
have made in my life up to this point would be worth nothing if I didn’t 
change that, and I have. 
 
At the hearing, Applicant initially provided contradictory information: 
 
I do not drink anymore, have not since May. What I do instead is I call my 
daughter, I call my mother, I call my grandmother. Sometimes I’ve talked 
to [witness] about it. I even watch Intervention, just to - - I mean, I did it 
last night, because I was so nervous. And it’s just something that, you 
know, if I look at and I see, then it reminds me of where I was before and 
what I could go back to.9 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 31-35, 44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4, 5. 
 
7 Tr. at 35-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 39-41; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 25. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant also stated that she occasionally watches the videotape of her arrest to deter 
her from drinking. She is disgusted by her behavior in the video. She was later asked 
the last time she had any alcohol. She stated it was “[p]robably around the end of 
January [2009] or beginning of February [2009].” She stated that she had alcohol on 
about eight to ten occasions since May 2007, but only in small amounts, three to four 
beers, or less.10  
 
Applicant has never been diagnosed as alcohol dependent or an alcohol abuser. 
When asked if she considered herself to be an alcoholic, she replied that she did. While 
she has not been totally abstinent, she stated that she was “trying to get there.”11 
 
 Applicant is highly regarded both professionally and personally. She submitted 
five character letters and a supervisor testified on her behalf. They are aware of her 
past alcohol issues and believe she has turned her life around. She is considered to be 
dedicated, trustworthy, professional, honest, and reliable. She is recommended for a 
security clearance.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 25, 38, 41-46. 
 
11 Tr. at 44-45. 
 
12 Tr. at 18-21; AE C. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
Applicant’s arrests and convictions are sufficient to raise both of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a) through (d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s most serious offenses were related to substance abuse, either 
marijuana or alcohol. She stopped smoking marijuana in about 2001, but her alcohol 
consumption increased. Her last DWI arrest was in February 2007, just over two years 
ago. There is no bright line rule as to what constitutes “so much time has elapsed since 
the criminal behavior happened” under AG ¶ 32(a), and “the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity” under AG ¶ 32(d). It depends upon the facts and 
circumstances of each case. Two years without recurrence of criminal conduct is a very 
good start on rehabilitation. There is other evidence of rehabilitation including remorse 
and a good employment record. My remaining concern is Applicant’s issues with 
alcohol, and specifically with her contradictory answers about her alcohol consumption. 
There is nothing ambiguous about her initial testimony when she said, “I do not drink 
anymore, have not since May.” She later provided totally different information. In order 
to find complete rehabilitation, there must be complete honesty. It is not clear in this 
case that I have received that. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) are partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant was not pressured or coerced into committing her criminal acts. AG ¶ 
32(c) is not applicable. It is unclear if the failure to maintain financial responsibility 
citation in 1992 was a criminal charge or a civil traffic violation. In either event, it is 
mitigated under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d), as is the bad check offense. 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
7 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant was arrested and convicted in 1996 and 2007 for DWI. She drank six to 
eight beers every day, and more than that four to five times a month. Her alcohol-
related incidents and pattern of alcohol consumption are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 22(a) 
and (c).  
 
Two Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
I find that AG ¶ 23(a) is partially applicable under the same rationale discussed 
above under the Criminal Conduct section. Applicant has never been diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent or an alcohol abuser, but she admitted that she considers herself to 
be an alcoholic. Since she has not been diagnosed as alcohol dependent, there is no 
requirement that she be totally abstinent. She is still trying to become totally abstinent. 
She reports responsible use. As discussed above, I remain concerned about her 
contradictory statements about her alcohol use. AG ¶ 23(b) is partially applicable 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 36 years old. Her 
substance abuse led to at least three convictions. It is unclear if the disorderly conduct 
conviction was alcohol-related because she does not recall the circumstances 
surrounding the charge. Applicant drank on a daily basis and acknowledges that she 
considers herself to be an alcoholic. She has apparently severely cut down on her 
drinking. Her friends, family, and co-workers have noticed a change in her life since she 
has reduced her drinking. She is highly regarded at work. While Applicant appeared to 
be otherwise honest at the hearing, she testified to two diametrically opposite things on 
the core issue of the case. Moreover, this is a case that when considered in the light 
most favorable to Applicant, still has Applicant with at least three substance-abuse-
related offenses, the most recent just over two years ago. Although she has taken steps 
in the right direction toward rehabilitation, it is too early to conclude that she has tackled 
her alcohol problems. As discussed above, I am concerned about the conflicting 
statements about her current alcohol use and therefore, I cannot find complete 
rehabilitation and mitigation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her criminal 
conduct and alcohol use. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant  
 
 
  
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
