DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXX, Xxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 07-15361
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 9 June 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
J and E.  Applicant answered the SOR 21 August 2008, and requested a decision1
without hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 10 February 2009. The record in this
case closed 31 December 2008, the day Applicant’s response to the government’s File
of Relevant Material (FORM) was due. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. DOHA
assigned the case to me 10 February 2009.
And the government did not allege any security concerns under drugs or alcohol. I mention the drug and2
alcohol history only as necessary background for Applicant’s criminal conduct.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Accordingly, I incorporate those
admissions as findings of fact. He is a 30-year-old graphic artist employed by a defense
contractor since July 2006. He has not previously held a  security clearance.
Applicant has an extensive history of criminal conduct dating back to 1996. Most
of his criminal conduct occurred in 1996, the year he turned 18 years old, and all the
crimes had negative implications for his honesty and trustworthiness. He was arrested
in April 1996 for felony unauthorized use of a vehicle. In May 1996, he was arrested for
shoplifting/ theft under $300. The charge was placed on the stet docket. In June 1996,
he was again arrested for theft under $300, found guilty, and fined. In November 1996,
he was arrested for petty larceny, found guilty, and served 50-days’ jail time of the 18
months he was awarded. In December 1996, he was charged with burglary/forced
entry, and ultimately incarcerated until May 1999.
Applicant attributed his misconduct in 1996 to his extensive drug and alcohol
abuse during that time in his life, brought on by his troubled childhood and the ensuing
depression. When he was incarcerated between 1997 and 1999, he sought help
through county-run drug and alcohol counseling programs. He claims no further drug
and alcohol abuse since he completed those programs.2
In May 2001, Applicant was arrested on felony charges of scheme/theft over
$500 and 14 counts of theft over $500 from his employer of nine months, a well-known
direct seller of frozen food products to individual homeowners. A driver for the company,
he had been caught skimming money from his daily sales over a period of time. At the
time, Applicant had experienced financial problems when his live-in girlfriend left her job
and he was unable to keep up with their household expenses on his earnings alone.
The company fired him.
Applicant eventually pled guilty to the scheme/theft charge and the remaining
charges were nolle prossed. He was awarded 18 months imprisonment, three years’
supervised probation, and indefinite probation until he made the $11,000 court-ordered
restitution to his employer. Applicant was released from prison in May 2002, and
completed the terms of his probation in July 2007. 
Applicant was also arrested for failure to appear in April 2005. However, police
records contain no information regarding the underlying charge, or  the disposition. That
tends to confirm Applicant’s claim that the arrest was a mistake based on incorrect
information obtained by the police.   
When Applicant applied for a security clearance in June 2007 (Item 4), he failed
to disclose that he had been fired from his driving job by answering “no” to question 22
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
3
(adverse employment terminations). He misrepresented the date of his felony arrest in
question 23 (police record—felonies) by placing it in May 1999 instead of May 2001. 
Applicant admits the omissions, but denies any intent to deceive. He claims he
forgot the correct date of his felony arrest, and did not intend to conceal his adverse
termination from employment because he disclosed the felony arrest that arose from the
conduct that caused him to be fired. This explanation might have been more plausible if
Applicant had disclosed this employer in question 11 (employments—last seven years).
Instead, he disclosed only a single employer between June 1999 and June 2003.
Applicant claims to have settled down and become a productive worker for his
employer. However, aside from the fact that he has had no significant criminal
involvement since May 2001, he has provided no independent corroboration of his
claimed rehabilitation and changed lifestyle.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
¶31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,4
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
¶32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual5
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or judgment; (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, . . . good employment record . . .
¶16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel6
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
¶17.(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification7
before being confronted with the facts;
4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline J, and
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Under different
circumstances, Applicant’s five arrests in 1996  might be considered mitigated by the4
passage of time, no further criminal conduct, and the substance abuse issues that
contributed to the conduct.  However, the lingering security concern is that each of5
these offenses goes directly to Applicant’s honesty and trustworthiness. That security
concern is heightened by Applicant’s May 2001 arrest for what amounted to
embezzlement from his employer. To the honesty and trustworthiness issues raised by
his earlier criminal activity, Applicant added a breach of the fiduciary duty he had to his
employer. Although he was released from jail in May 2002, he was not released from
probation until July 2007—about 18 months ago. I resolve Guideline J against
Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. He deliberately concealed his May
2001 firing from his job (as he did the employment itself, although not alleged by the
government).  Disclosing a “May 1999" arrest for the charges that were actually brought6
in May 2001, does not constitute full disclosure of his employment and the adverse
termination from it. Further, I believe Applicant deliberately concealed the correct date
of the arrest to put it farther in the past from his July 2007 clearance application.
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant did not disclose the information until his
subject interview later in July 2007 (Item 7).  Record evidence clearly suggests that7
Applicant intended to conceal the fact of his termination for cause in May 2001. This
conduct violated 18 U.S.C. §1001, whether or not he was successful in effecting the
course of his investigation.
Applicant’s concealment of relevant and material information demonstrates a lack
of candor required of cleared personnel. The government has an interest in examining
all relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before making a
5
clearance decision. The government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that
adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about
himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
Beyond the specific guidelines alleged by the government, the generally
applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions lead to the same result. Theft, breach
of fiduciary duty, and falsifications are core security concerns [RAG &2(a)(1)]. His
behavior was deliberate and not due to circumstances beyond his control [RAG
&2(a)(2); RAG &2(a)(5)]. His misconduct was both recent and frequent [RAG &2(a)(3)].
Applicant was not a neophyte when he made his falsifications [RAG &2(a)(4).)].
Rehabilitation and other behavioral changes are difficult to measure under these
circumstances, as he produced no evidence to corroborate his claims [RAG & 2(a)(6)].
He clearly sought to mislead the government about employment and arrest [RAG
&2(a)(7)].
Applicant’s willingness to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government
interests increases his potential vulnerability and he has not demonstrated that the
misconduct is unlikely to recur [RAG & 2(a)(8); RAG & 2(a)(9)]. The concern is whether
Applicant would disclose situations or circumstances, whether deliberate or inadvertent,
that raise security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial doubt
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal
record and falsifications.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph g: For Applicant
Subparagraph h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
