1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-06571
SSN: ------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), dated November 22, 2007, and a Standard Form 86 – Questionnaire for Sensitive
Positions (SF-86), with signed releases dated November 26, 2007. On December 2,
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended, the Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 10, 2008. In his
August 18, 2008, response to the SOR, he admitted 5 of 25 allegations under Guideline
F and declined to address the allegations raised under Guideline E. He also requested
a determination based on the written record. 
 Item 6 (SF-86 Form).1
 FORM at 4.2
2
In response to Applicant’s answer, Department Counsel prepared a File of
Relevant Material (FORM), dated January 27, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on
February 6, 2009. His response to that FORM was received and accepted without
objection on by Department Counsel on February 25, 2009. 
The case was forwarded to DOHA for assignment to an Administrative Judge for
a determination. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2003. Based upon a review
of the complete case file and exhibits, I find it is not clearly consistent with the national
security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 26-year-old supply clerk who has worked for the same defense
contractor since November 2007. He graduated from high school in May 2000. He
joined the United States Army in November 2000 and served until January 2007. During
his service, he was awarded the Army Commendation Medal, the Army Achievement
Medal, and several lesser decorations, including a Combat Action Badge. Applicant
served one year in Iraq. After being honorably discharged in January 2007 by reason of
disability, he experienced a period of unemployment through March 2007. In March
2007, he was hired by his current employer, but in a different capacity than the one in
which he currently works. Applicant married in 2006, but the couple had separated by
August 2008. They have no children.
In November 2007, Applicant completed both an e-QIP and a SF-86. He noted in
the “General Comments” area of the SF-86 that he had not checked his credit reports
prior to completing the form.  In completing the November 3, 2007, e-QIP, Applicant1
denied having had his wages garnished or having had any property repossessed for
any reason within the past 7 years. He did not mention the debts noted under SOR
allegations 1.q and 1.v until later. Department Counsel conceded allegation 2.c, noting
there is no record evidence to support falsification.  2
In completing the November 22, 2007, SF-86, Applicant denied being over 90-
days delinquent on any debts in response to question 28b. Similarly, he denied having
ever been over 180-days delinquent on any debts in the last seven years in response to
question 28a. Applicant had delinquent debts of this type, several of which he
acknowledged when he was apprised of their existence. Applicant denies committing a
falsity in giving these answers in November 2007.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to the debts contained in
allegations 1.h ($420, toward which he made one $50 payment), 1.q ($6,434), 1.r ($75,
for which he provided documentation of full account satisfaction), 1.v ($13,290), and 1.y
 The debts upon which the allegations are based come from credit reports dated December 6, 2007, May 30,3
2008, and July 17, 2008. See Items 8 and 9 (Credit Reports), as well as Item 7 (Response to Interrogatories,
dated Aug. 7, 2008).
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).4
3
($5,653).  He noted that the two largest debts, 1.q and 1.v, to which he admits, were3
related to his medical disability. He claims they were charged off because the creditors
would not work with him while he was unemployed. In sum, Applicant paid $125 toward
an acknowledged debt of approximately $26,000. 
Applicant denied the remaining 21 debts, which amount to approximately
$22,100. In most of his denials, Applicant states terse, one or two sentence assertions
regarding the accounts. For example, he suggests that some of the adverse credit
entries pertain to his father and not to him. There is no tangible evidence supporting
any such assertions. The record only reflects less than five attempts to formally dispute
or make inquiry as to alleged debts. Similarly, there is no evidence of financial
counseling.   
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2©,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).6
 Id.7
 Id.8
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.9
4
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable5
clearance decision is on the applicant.  6
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access7
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily8
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the9
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline F(Financial
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) to be the most pertinent to the
evaluation of the facts in this case. Conditions pertaining to these adjudicative
guidelines that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as
those which would mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed in the
conclusions below.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.10
5
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Conversely, an individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  The Regulation sets out several potential disqualifying conditions. 10
Applicant’s responses to the SOR and FORM include scant facts and little to no
narrative as to how these debts were acquired or how they became delinquent. Over
the years, Applicant acquired over $48,000 in debt. He denies about half of this
delinquent debt as being his. As to the half he admits, he only has paid approximately
$125 – a $75 balance on one account and $50 toward a larger bill. Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts”) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Appellant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant details a three month period of unemployment following his honorable
discharge from the service. He also notes that he was married prior to that discharge,
but separated not long after his discharge. Applicant failed, however, to document any
links between these incidents and any specific debts or show that he otherwise
behaved responsibly as these delinquent debts accrued. Therefore, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (“the conditions that resulted
in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation)
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances”) does not apply.
The delinquent debts at issue are numerous. Their origins are, for the most part,
unknown. The debts, both admitted and denied, remain largely unaddressed. Of the
approximately $48,000 at issue, one account for $75 was paid, $50 was paid toward a
larger balance, and a couple of accounts were disputed. Therefore, neither Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment”) nor FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”) applies. Moreover, Applicant failed
to offer any evidence that he has received financial counseling. Nor is there evidence
his financial problems are otherwise resolved or under control. Therefore, FC MC AG ¶
20(c) (“the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”) does not apply.
Given hints of information regarding Applicant’s medical disability and marital
separation, there may be sufficient cause to consider the debts at issue mitigated. The
burden, however, is on the Applicant to produce evidence of such mitigation and
Applicant has produced scant evidence or narration regarding his disability, his
separation, his finances, or his life. Moreover, taking him at his word that only the
$26,000 in debt to which he admits is properly attributable to him, he still has only paid
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15.11
 FORM at 4.12
6
about $125 toward that balance. Further, he has been employed since March 2007 and
received the SOR in December 2008. Applicant demonstrated minimal efforts in the
intervening periods to address the debts at issue. With financial considerations security
concerns left unmitigated, those security concerns remain.
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations could indicate
that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  Refusal to undergo11
or cooperate with required security processing or refusal to complete required forms,
releases, or provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions in connection
with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination will normally result in an
unfavorable clearance action or administrative determination of further processing for
clearance eligibility. Department Counsel concedes the allegation noted at SOR 2.c
regarding Applicant’s answer on his November 7, 2007, e-QIP.  That leaves12
consideration of the financial questions posed on the SF-86 application regarding
allegations 2.a and 2.b. 
At the end of his SF-86, Applicant disclosed that he had not consulted his credit
report. Not having reviewed his credit report and lacking direct knowledge of those
accounts included, Applicant could not have deliberately concealed its contents.
Moreover, Applicant denies concealing information or otherwise committing a falsity,
and there is no evidence of intentional falsity. Lacking evidence of an intent to falsify, no
disqualifying condition can be raised.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
 AG ¶ 2(b).13
7
factors noted above. The facts of record are limited due to the brevity of Applicant’s
submissions. Applicant is a young man who, fresh out of high school, chose to serve his
country in the U.S. Army. His service was distinguished and honorable. 
In the current economic climate, debt has become common place. Delinquent
and unaddressed debt, however, raise security concerns. Here, Applicant denies half
the delinquent accounts at issue are his, citing to various possibilities for their entry on
his credit reports. Thus far, however, minimal efforts have been exerted to dispute
these entries with his creditors or the major credit reporting bureaus, or to otherwise
seek their removal from his credit report. As for the delinquent debt to which he admits,
payment has been made toward only $125 of an admitted balance of approximately
$26,000. There is no tangible evidence that he sought financial counseling to help
address his past delinquent debts, manage his present income, or plan for his future.
There is no documentary evidence that he has explored or initiated bankruptcy, a
repayment plan, or other strategy to address these delinquent debts. Indeed, there is
no actual evidence of any comprehensive plan to start addressing the accounts raising
financial security concerns so as to mitigate those concerns. 
Also lacking, however, is evidence that Applicant intentionally tried to conceal or
falsify information about his delinquent accounts. Applicant acknowledged in his SF-86
that he had not consulted his credit report. The scant facts of record reflect and support
his lack of knowledge as to the extent of the debt reflected on his credit report at the
time. Moreover, for much the same reason Department Counsel conceded the
allegation at SOR 1.c, there is insufficient evidence to suggest intentional falsity or
concealment as to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b.
In sum, Applicant is a young man whose military career was cut short by medical
disability. For vague reasons, he accumulated between $26,000 and $48,000 in
delinquent debt. He failed to provide tangible evidence of efforts to address these
debts. The delinquencies at issue remain largely outstanding and unaddressed.
Consequently, for failing to carry his burden, financial security concerns remain
unmitigated. Therefore, because any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information must be resolved in favor of the national security,
clearance is denied.13
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d Against Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.e Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.w Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
