KEYWORD: Guideline C
DIGEST: Applicant’s acquisition of Mexican citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen, his
ownership of property in Mexico, and his voting in Mexican elections raised security concerns
which he failed to mitigate.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 08-03389.a1
DATE: 03/11/2009
DATE:  March 11, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-03389
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 15, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On January 14, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Charles D. Ablard
The Judge found Applicant applied for Mexican citizenship in 2003 after having become a naturalized
1
U.S. citizen in 1993.  He obtained a document identifying him as a Mexican citizen residing abroad for use in
traveling to and from Mexico.  He also owns property in Mexico and voted in the 2006 Mexican presidential
elections.
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision under Guideline C is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant asks that the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision be reversed, arguing that
he is willing to renounce his Mexican citizenship.   Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that1
the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05632 at 2 (App. Bd. May 13, 2008).
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against the seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances and considered the possible
application of relevant conditions and factors.  He reasonably explained why the evidence which the
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by
Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  The Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)). “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
