                                                                
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 08-07721 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gary J. Rigney, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Position (SF 86) for a periodic 
update of his security clearance on May 7, 2008.  On December 17, 2008, The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H for drug involvement.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 7, 2009, and answered 
the allegations in writing on January 12, 2009.  He admitted both allegations under 
Guidelines H with explanation, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 28, 2009, and the case was 
assigned to me on February 23, 2009.  DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 
24, 2009, for a hearing on March 18, 2009.  I convened the hearing as scheduled.  The 
government offered three exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1-3 which 
 
2 
 
were received without objection.  Applicant submitted two exhibits marked Applicant 
Exhibits (App. Ex.) A and B, which were received without objection.  Applicant and two 
witnesses testified on Applicant's behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on March 26, 2009.  Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR with explanation.  He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old unmarried engineer working as a computer electronic 
designer for a defense contractor.  He started working as a co-op student for the 
defense contractor when he was 17 years old and in high school (See Gov. Ex. 2, 
Security Clearance Application, dated April 30, 2003).  He continued in the position 
through college and started working full time for the defense contractor in March 2008, 
shortly after graduating from college in December 2007 with an engineering degree.  
Applicant received his first security clearance in 2003 when he was just turning 18 years 
old, entering college, and working as a college level co-op student (Tr. 13-14, 26-31; 
Gov. Ex. 1, SF 86, dated May 7, 2008). 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application for a periodic update of his 
security clearance on May 7, 2008 (Gov. Ex. 1, SF 86, dated May 7, 2008).  In response 
to questions 24A and 24B concerning use of illegal drugs, Applicant answered "YES" to 
using illegal drugs and using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.  In the 
remarks section under question 24, Applicant noted he used marijuana twice, once in 
January 2007 and again in December 2007.  In response to Interrogatories, Applicant 
stated he took one to three hits of marijuana each time.  He stated his last use of 
marijuana was in December 2007 (Gov. Ex. 3, Answers to Interrogatories, dated 
September 8, 2008).   
 
 Applicant was interviewed on June 19, 2008, by a security investigator 
concerning his use of marijuana.  In a summary of his responses to the security agent 
attached to his Answer to the Interrogatories, Applicant stated he used marijuana with 
either his older brother or friends on both occasions.  He stated his use was 
experimental out of curiosity.  He felt no effect from the drug, and the marijuana tasted 
bad and made him cough.  He stopped using marijuana after the December 2007 use 
because he did not plan to make it a habit to use marijuana and he did not feel the need 
to use the drug.  He did not purchase the drug either time since the marijuana was 
offered to him in a social setting (Gov. Ex. 3, Answers to Interrogatories, dated 
September 8, 2008). 
 
 Applicant testified that his older brother used drugs when they were growing up 
and it caused a problem in the family.  This gave him a motivation not to use drugs.  His 
first use of marijuana was in January 2007 with friends while playing video games.  He 
 
3 
 
took a few hits from a device that was passed to him.  He wanted to be polite to his 
friends while in this social setting.  He believed it would be rude not to participate.  His 
friends knew where he worked but not that he held a security clearance.  At the time, he 
was 22 years old.  His friends were about the same age.  While he was free to decide at 
the time if he wanted to use the drug, he did not think about the consequences of drug 
use (Tr. 15-16, 31-33, 41-44). 
 
 Applicant used marijuana again in December 2007 at a party at his brother's 
house to celebrate Applicant's graduation from college.  He again took two or three hits 
of marijuana from a device to be polite.  There were six to eight friends present and they 
were drinking beer and using a vaporizer to inhale marijuana.  They were having a party 
and everyone was using the marijuana.  He was with friends and family that he trusted 
and respected so he used the marijuana (Tr. 15-20, 35-36).   
 
 Applicant stated it has been his practice since high school to leave an area 
where drugs are used.  He told people that he does not want to be involved in illegal 
drug use.  He admitted going against his own policy when he used marijuana in January 
and December 2007.  He also admitted that his facility security officer impressed upon 
him when he first applied for a security clearance in 2003 that he should not use illegal 
drugs while holding a security clearance.  At that time, he was against drug use.  He 
took her advice seriously, but he did not think about it when he used marijuana in 2007.  
In 2007, he was just completing college and he made a mistake by using marijuana (Tr. 
44-47).   
 
 Applicant stated that he has changed his social habits since 2007.  He does not 
now normally associate with friends who use drugs.  He does see his brother but does 
not know if he still uses drugs since he does not use drugs around him.  If he sees his 
friends now, they are in public and not at someone's house where it is easy to use 
illegal drugs.  He is now working full time and has obligations to help his father who is 
retired and needs his support.  He does not have close friends who use illegal drugs.  
He spends his time in athletics, like martial arts and swimming.  He took a drug test in 
February 2009 on the advice of his attorney which was negative for drugs (App. Ex. B, 
Test results, dated February 11, 2009).  He completed an affidavit that he consents to 
testing for drug use and acknowledges that if he uses illegal drugs in the future, he 
would lose his access to classified information (App. Ex. A, Affidavit, dated February 11, 
2009).  Applicant stated his only use of illegal drugs was in January and December 
2007, and his last use of illegal drugs was in December 2007.  He stated his intention 
not to use illegal drugs in the future because he no longer has friends that use illegal 
drugs and he realizes the consequences of illegal drug use for himself and his job (Tr. 
21-26, 39-42, 46-50). 
 
 Applicant's immediate supervisor testified that he hired Applicant as a co-op 
student while Applicant was in high school.  Applicant has worked for him for about 
eight years.  He has known Applicant for over 15 years and watched him grow up.   He 
hired Applicant out of high school because he knew of his talents and his good attitude 
towards work.  Applicant is very dependable and seeks work.  He is a valuable core 
member of his team and is dependable with good work ethics.  Applicant has always 
 
4 
 
adhered to the physical security rules at work for handling classified information.  
Applicant socializes with him and his family and others from work.  Applicant conducts 
himself very appropriately.  He has never seen Applicant in any inappropriate behavior.  
He was shocked to learn of Applicant's use of illegal drugs on two occasions.  He 
believes Applicant made a mistake and it does not alter his opinion of Applicant.  He is 
disappointed in Applicant for making such an unfortunate mistake.  His company does 
not have a formal drug policy except that it is known that employees should not use 
illegal drugs because of their access to classified information (Tr. 53-65). 
 
 A fellow worker who has known Applicant for over five years testified he sees 
Applicant on a daily basis and works close to him.  Applicant is pleasant at work, arrives 
on time, and is rarely absent from work.  Applicant does a fantastic job and is the office 
go-to person to solve problems.  Applicant always follows the rules concerning access 
to classified information.  Applicant relates well to others at work.  He was surprised to 
learn that Applicant used marijuana on two occasions.  However, he is not surprised 
Applicant admitted the use since he is a very honest person.  Applicant's use of 
marijuana does not alter his opinion of him, and he does not believe it will hinder 
Applicant's handling of classified information.  The witness and his family and other 
fellow employees socialize with Applicant outside of work.  None of the group uses 
illegal drugs.  He believes the company drug policy follows the federal guidelines in that 
they cannot use illegal drugs (Tr. 65-74).   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include those listed on the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.  
Marijuana is listed as a controlled substance drug under the Controlled Substance Act 
of 1970.  Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 24). 
 The information in the exhibits presented at the hearing by the government and 
Applicant's answers and testimony are sufficient to raise Drug Involvement Disqualifying 
Conditions (DI DC) AG ¶ 25(a) "any drug use", DI DC AG ¶ 25(c) "illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution", and DI DC AG ¶ 25(g) "any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance".  It is clear from Applicant's own statement that he used marijuana in 
January and December 2007.  He had to possess the marijuana to use it.  He has held 
a security clearance since 2003, so he used marijuana while holding a security 
clearance.  Even though his drug use was experimental, it raises a security clearance 
concern. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate his use of illegal drug (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15).  An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government.   
 
 I considered Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) ¶ 26(a) "the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; and DI MC ¶ 26(b) "a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) disassociation from 
drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where 
drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation".  Applicant used 
marijuana twice in 2007 with his last use in December 2007, about fifteen months 
before the hearing.  At the time of his use of the illegal drug, Applicant was twenty-two 
years old and a college student who was socializing with his brother and other friends.  
He used marijuana on these occasions mainly out of curiosity. His use of marijuana was 
infrequent in that he only used it twice about twelve months apart.  Applicant used 
marijuana while holding a security clearance which he received when he was about 
eighteen years old.  He has now graduated from college, is steadily employed, and has 
changed his social habits and his friends.  His supervisor and fellow worker attest to his 
good work performance and ethics and his reputation for honesty and integrity.   
 
 Applicant stated his intention not to use illegal drugs in the future. He stated he 
no longer goes to places where drugs are used and rarely associates with people that 
use drugs.  He submitted to a drug test just prior to the hearing which indicates that he 
was drug free at the time of the test and a further indication that he is not now using 
illegal drugs.  He executed an affidavit that he will not use illegal drugs in the future and 
that he would automatically lose his access to classified information if he did use illegal 
drugs.   
  
 Applicant reported that he used marijuana on two occasions on his security 
clearance application.  Except for Applicant's admission on the application, it is doubtful 
that his marijuana use would be known to his company or security officials.  While he 
was required to list his use of marijuana on his security clearance application because 
of the requirement to answer all questions truthfully, the fact that he did list his 
marijuana use is some indication of his honesty and truthfulness.  He testified at the 
hearing openly and candidly providing detailed responses to questions.  His testimony 
that he only used marijuana on two occasions in 2007 and has not used marijuana 
since December 2007 is credible.  His intention not to use marijuana in the future is also 
understandable and credible.  His testimony is sufficient information to establish he no 
longer uses illegal drugs.  While the time since his last use of marijuana is only fifteen 
months, under the circumstances of his age at the time of use, his status as a college 
student, a recent negative drug test, and the execution of a document of automatic 
revocation for using illegal drugs, sufficient time has passed since his last use of illegal 
drugs to indicate he no longer uses illegal drugs.  Applicant met his heavy burden of 
 
7 
 
establishing that his past drug use does not now raise questions concerning his 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
I find for Applicant as to drug involvement under Guideline H. 
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that Applicant has 
been employed by the same defense contractor since he was a high school student, 
that his employment record is good, and that he is held in high esteem by this 
supervisor and fellow worker.  I considered that he was only twenty-two years old and a 
college student when he used marijuana and that he has now matured and understands 
the consequences of his action in using illegal drugs.  He has changed his social habits 
and the people he socializes with to avoid situations where drugs are used.  I 
considered that he recently tested negative for drug use, and he signed a document that 
if he used illegal drugs in the future he would automatically lose his security clearance.  
Overall on balance, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant's eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
