 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06441 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Applicant’s father], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2009, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on March 19, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
 
2 
 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, called one 
witness, and submitted Exhibit (AE) A, which was received without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 27, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She attended 
college for a period but did not obtain a degree. She is married with two children, ages 
ten and seven.1  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $9,601. SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e 
consist of five medical debts totaling $472. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a debt to a collection 
company for $9,129. Applicant admitted all the allegations in her response to the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s husband served in the United States Army. There is no indication of 
any financial difficulties before he was discharged in 2000. He was unemployed for an 
extended period and certain bills went unpaid. The debt of $9,129 is to a collection 
company, collecting what was originally a credit card debt. The balance on the account 
was about $4,500 when Applicant stopped making payments in 2000. Her husband 
rejoined the Army in 2001, and their finances stabilized. She paid several accounts that 
were delinquent. She contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.f after her husband was back in 
the Army about paying the debt. The company wanted half of the debt paid up front and 
the remainder paid in three monthly payments. It was unwilling to accept any other 
payment arrangements. Applicant and her husband could not afford that much money in 
such a short period and did not pay the account. She has not heard from the creditor in 
many years. The debt is no longer listed on her credit report. She believes the account 
is uncollectable because of the statute of limitations and is hesitant to contact the 
creditor because it could revive the debt and open her to a lawsuit.2  
 
 Applicant’s believes the five medical debts should have been paid through her 
husband’s military medical insurance, TRICARE. TRICARE has different plans. Her 
family had TRICARE Prime, the plan that has the least flexibility to obtain health care 
providers, but normally incurs the least out-of-pocket costs. She stated that she never 
received any medical bills that were not paid. She learned about the debts when she 
took her child to the hospital and they told her that she had open accounts. She 
requested an accounting of the debts, but the hospital refused to provide it to her, citing 
privacy concerns. She even received a $250 refund from an overpayment she made on 
another bill. She was perplexed as to why the hospital sent her a refund if the hospital 
believed she owed on her accounts. She is willing to pay the debts if they are her 
responsibility, but will not pay them until she is provided a detailed accounting of the 
debts.3  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-18, 21-23, 30-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4.  
 
3 Tr. at 14-16, 19, 23-24, 28-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s husband was medically discharged from the Army in 2006. He has 
been steadily employed since then. Applicant was a stay-at-home mother for about two 
years from about late 2003 through 2005. She has had constant employment since she 
returned to the workforce. She has worked for her current employer since the summer 
of 2007. Applicant has not received financial counseling. Other than what is reflected in 
the SOR, she has no delinquent debts. Her family’s current financial situation is sound. 
They are able to pay their debts and expenses with some extra at the end of the 
month.4 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor wrote that her job performance is excellent and her 
character is that of an honest, dedicated, and hard working person. He recommends her 
for a security clearance.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 19-21, 24-28; GE 1-4. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems started in 2000, when her husband was 
discharged from the military and was unemployed for an extended period. Their 
finances stabilized after her husband returned to the military a year later. She paid 
several debts, but the creditor for the large credit card debt refused to accept any 
payment arrangements other than half immediately and the rest in three monthly 
payments. She could not afford those arrangements and did not pay the debt. It has 
since dropped off her credit report. She is reluctant to pursue further negotiations with 
the creditor for fear that it would revive the debt from being barred by the statute of 
limitations and open her to a lawsuit. Applicant credibly testified that she never received 
medical bills that went unpaid, and that she would pay the medical debts if the hospital 
responded to her request to provide a full accounting of the debts. Her finances are 
currently in good shape. She and her husband are both employed. They are not 
accruing new delinquent debt, and they have money left over at the end of the month. 
Her testimony about the medical debts was credible. The amount of her medical debt is 
insufficient to raise any real security concerns. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not completely applicable even if the credit card debt is 
uncollectable because Applicant acknowledged she owed the debt and it has never 
been paid. The medical debts have also not been completely resolved. Her husband’s 
unemployment qualifies as a condition that was largely beyond her control. AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant paid 
some debts after her husband rejoined the military. She could not make the payments 
that the credit card required and that debt was never paid. She never went back and 
attempted to renegotiate payments with the creditor, which would have been the 
responsible action under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(a) is partially applicable. That debt 
is no longer listed on her credit report and Applicant believes it is barred by the statute 
of limitations. However, Applicant does not receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(d) for 
 
6 
 
relying on the statute of limitations as a defense to paying the debt.6 She has not 
received financial counseling. However, she and her husband are now financially 
solvent. Her financial problems are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is 
partially applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
31-year-old mother of two who encountered financial difficulties in 2000, when her 
husband was discharged from the Army and could not find employment. He rejoined the 
Army in 2001, and their finances stabilized. They paid several debts, and with the 
exception of the relatively small medical debts, she has not accrued new delinquent 
                                                          
6 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No.  99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
debts. The credit card debt in issue was accrued up through 2000, when Applicant was 
in her early twenties. As discussed above, relying on the statute of limitations is not 
being completely responsible. However, if the debt is uncollectible, the risk of her having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds and her potential vulnerability to financial 
inducements are greatly reduced. The creditor is no longer pursuing her for this debt. At 
some point, it no longer indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations. She has reached that point in time.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
