 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04384 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and 
J (Criminal Conduct), arising from Applicant’s sexual conduct with a 13-year-old girl. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 19, 2007 (Government Exhibit (GX) 4). On October 10, 2008, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security 
concerns under Guidelines D and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2008, and requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s written case on December 31, 2008. On January 7, 2009, a complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on January 12, 2009, and he did 
not submit any additional materials. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old web developer employed by a federal contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer since September 2005. He has never held a 
security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in April 2005, and has a three-year-old daughter. He has a 
high school education and attended a community college for about six months but did 
not receive a degree or diploma.  
 
 During the summer of 2000, when Applicant was 21 years old, he began chatting 
on the internet with a girl he believed was 17 or 18 years old. Their online conversations 
soon became sexually explicit. After a short time, they agreed to meet at the girl’s 
home. During the meeting Applicant discovered that the girl was only 13 years old. 
Nevertheless, he had sexual intercourse with her in her bedroom. After this meeting, 
they chatted only about once a month. In November or December 2000, they met at a 
high school football game, walked to a nearby wooded area, and again had sexual 
intercourse. Applicant’s 22nd birthday was on December 3, 2000. In late December 
2000, Applicant attempted to contact the girl and learned that the girl’s mother had 
discovered the sexually explicit internet exchanges and notified the local sheriff. 
Applicant was arrested on December 29, 2000, and charged with committing a lewd and 
lascivious act in the presence of a child under the age of 16, a felony. He was jailed 
overnight and released on a $10,000 bond (GX 5). 
 
 In June 2001, Applicant pleaded nolo contendere and was found guilty. He was 
sentenced to three years of probation, two years of community control, and a fine (GX 
8). He was required to register as a sex offender. He will remain on the registered sex 
offender list until June 2024 (GX 3, 6). 
 
 The state law pertaining to registration of sex offenders includes legislative 
findings that sexual offenders who prey on children are “sexual predators,” that they 
present an “extreme threat to the public safety,” and that they are extremely likely to 
repeat their offenses (GX 7). 
 
 3
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant characterized his conduct as “a single 
incident.” He stated that he was “saddened and disgusted” by his actions and he has 
complied with all the requirements for registered sex offenders, including therapy 
specific to his crime. He stated he has committed no crimes since his conviction in June 
2001 and has no intentions of doing so (GX 3). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 4
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was arrested on December 29, 2000, charged with 
committing a lewd and lascivious act with a child under the age of 16, pleaded nolo 
contendere, was convicted, and was sentenced to three years of probation, two years of 
community control, a fine, and court costs (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges he was required 
to register as a sex offender under the state Sexual Predators Act, notify state 
authorities of his current address every two years, and remain registered as a sex 
offender until at least June 2024 (SOR ¶ 1.b).  
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out AG ¶ 12, in pertinent part as 
follows: “Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may subject the 
individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.” The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 13(a) (“sexual behavior of a 
criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted”); AG ¶ 13(c) 
(“sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or 
duress”); and AG ¶ 13(d) (“sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of 
discretion or judgment”).  
 
I conclude that AG ¶ 13(a) is raised because Applicant’s conduct was a felony 
under state law. AG ¶ 13(c) is not raised because Applicant’s conviction and registration 
as a sex offender are public records, removing his vulnerability to threats of disclosure. 
AG ¶ 13(d) is raised because Applicant’s behavior, while not of a public nature, 
reflected lack of discretion and good judgment. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 13(a) and (d), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 5
Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the sexual behavior 
happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 14(b). The first prong of AG ¶ 14(b) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent.  There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 
(App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant’s sexual behavior with the 13-year-old girl ended when he was arrested 
about eight years ago. Eight years is a “significant period of time,” raising the question 
whether that time period demonstrates rehabilitation. I conclude that the eight-year 
period without further misconduct is not sufficient to demonstrate rehabilitation, for the 
following reasons.  
 
 First, Applicant did not engage in a “single incident” as he asserts in his answer 
to the SOR; it was a six-month course of conduct with two separate incidents of sexual 
intercourse. His attempt to minimize his conduct in his answer militates against a finding 
that he is rehabilitated. Second, Applicant did not voluntarily terminate his relationship 
with the girl. It was terminated by his arrest after the girl’s mother reported the sexually 
explicit email exchanges to the local sheriff. Third, although Applicant refers to his 
therapy in his answer to the SOR, he has submitted no evidence of the nature or 
duration of the therapy, and there is no evidence of the prognosis for recurrence. 
Fourth, as recognized by the state legislature, Applicant’s six-month period of preying 
on a 13-year-old girl is a crime for which the recidivism rate is high. Fifth, because 
Applicant requested an administrative determination without a hearing, I have had no 
opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity.  
 
 Finally, Applicant has been under close surveillance during the past eight years, 
facing severe criminal penalties for any recurrence. The state has determined that he 
should remain on the register of sex offenders until June 2024. Whether he would 
repeat his predatory sexual behavior in the absence of close monitoring cannot be 
determined from this record. Based on the evidence of record, I conclude that 
insufficient time has passed to justify a conclusion that Applicant is rehabilitated.  
 
 The second prong of AG ¶ 14(b) (“so infrequently”) is not established because 
Applicant engaged in a six-month relationship with the 13-year-old girl that included 
frequent sexually explicit conversations and two acts of sexual intercourse. The third 
prong is not established because Applicant’s conduct did not arise from unusual 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Finally, his conduct casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 14(b) is not 
established. 
 
 6
 Security concerns arising from sexual behavior also may be mitigated if “the 
behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress.” AG ¶ 14(c). 
This mitigating condition is established, because the public record of Applicant’s 
conviction and registration as a sex offender eliminates his vulnerability to threats to 
disclose his behavior. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the sexual 
behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.” AG ¶ 14(d). Applicant’s behavior 
was private, but it was not consensual or discreet. The 13-year-old girl was incapable of 
consent as the term is used under this guideline. Carrying on a sexual relationship with 
a 13-year-old girl and engaging in sexual intercourse in her bedroom and in the woods 
near a football stadium was not discreet behavior.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges Applicant’s arrest, conviction and sentencing 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a under Guideline E. The security concern regarding criminal 
conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant’s felony conviction alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
raises the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) under this guideline. 
 
 Security concerns arising from criminal conduct may be mitigated if “so much 
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). For the reasons 
set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 14(b) under Guideline D, I conclude this 
mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “there is evidence 
of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). 
Applicant expressed sadness and disgust about his behavior in his answer to the SOR, 
which is tantamount to remorse. He asserted that he has a good employment record 
and is pursuing several certifications related to his employment, but he has submitted 
no evidence in terms of performance appraisals, diplomas, certificates, or character 
reference letters to establish his good employment record and job training efforts. He 
has presented no evidence of community involvement. For these reasons as well as the 
reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 14(b), I conclude this mitigating 
condition is not established.  
 7
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines D and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant was an adult when he commenced his sexual relationship with a 13-
year-old girl. He continued the relationship and twice had sexual intercourse with her 
even after learning of her tender age. He did not voluntarily terminate the relationship 
and likely would have continued it for a time if he had not been arrested. He is now 30 
years old, married, and the father of a daughter. He has presented no evidence from 
medical professionals or others to show that he does not fit the state legislature’s 
description of sexual predators who prey on children. Whether he would revert to old 
behavior if released from the constraints of the sex offender registration program cannot 
be determined. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines D and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on sexual behavior and 
criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Behavior):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
