                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ADP Case No. 08-00969 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate trustworthiness concerns regarding concerns 
regarding his criminal conduct. His felony-level convictions in October 2004 of a crime 
against nature (sodomy) and in July 2005 of perjury are too recent and serious. 
Applicant is still on probation and is a registered sexual offender. Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy an ADP I/II/III position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on April 
11, 2007 (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On November 19, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
basis for its preliminary decision to deny Applicant eligibility for a public trust position, 
citing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and J (Criminal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and 
 
2                                                                                              
                                           
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.     
 
Applicant’s response to the SOR was notarized on December 31, 2008, and it 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on February 2, 2009. The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2009. On 
February 10, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice. The hearing was held on March 2, 
2009. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered six exhibits (GEs 1-6) (Transcript 
(Tr.) 17), and Applicant offered 13 exhibits (Tr. 18-21; AE A-M). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GEs 1-6 (Tr. 17), and AEs A-M (Tr. 21). Additionally, I 
admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and the hearing notice (GEs 7-9). I received 
the transcript on March 13, 2009.  
 
Procedural Issues1 
 
The SOR cited facts that would have brought Applicant’s case under the 
prohibitions of the Smith Amendment (10 U.S.C. § 986), because he was convicted and 
sentenced to punishments including five years of confinement for perjury. Applicant was 
confined for more than one year (October 13, 2004, until December 12, 2006) (GE 2 at 
6; GE 3). However, this section of the United States Code, which applied only to 
clearances granted by DoD, was repealed on January 28, 2008, when the President 
signed the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 into law. It was 
replaced by adding Sec. 3002 to 50 U.S.C. § 435b (the Bond Amendment), which 
applies throughout the Federal Government. Sec. 3002(c) of this new provision 
continues the requirement for disqualification, absent a meritorious waiver, for persons 
who were sentenced to and served imprisonment for more than a year. However, this 
disqualification only applies to prevent clearances that would provide access to special 
access programs (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), or any other information commonly 
referred to as “special compartmented information” (SCI). 
 
This statutory modification ends the former Smith Amendment requirement for a 
meritorious Secretarial waiver to grant or continue a regular, or “collateral,” security 
clearance to a person who has received a conviction and served over one year of 
confinement. On June 20, 2008, prior to the issuance of the SOR and the hearing in this 
case, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) issued a memorandum providing 
interim guidance for implementation of the Bond Amendment. This memorandum set 
forth guidance for adjudicators to assess the potential application of the Bond 
Amendment to security clearance determinations and requirements for “Exception” 
identification of persons subject to its limitations in the Joint Adjudication Management 
System (JAMS) if a collateral clearance is granted. The granting of access to SAP, RD 
or SCI to such individuals requires a meritorious waiver under the terms of that 
memorandum. Such access is not at issue in this case, and accordingly the Bond 
Amendment was not addressed in either the SOR or at the hearing. 
 
1Administrative Judge White cogently explained the interplay between the Smith Act, the Bond 
Amendment and revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) J in ISCR Case No. 07-11963 (A.J. Aug. 20, 2008). 
I have borrowed freely and extensively without further citation from his explanation in this section.   
 
3                                                                                              
                                           
The repeal of the Smith Amendment also nullified the legal authority by which the 
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence modified the revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) that were approved by the President on December 29, 2005. When the 
Under Secretary promulgated the AG for use within DoD, on August 30, 2006, he added 
provisions reflecting the Smith Amendment. AG H (Drug Involvement), AG I 
(Psychological Conditions), and AG J (Criminal Conduct) were each modified, but only 
the latter guideline is involved in this case. It was modified by adding AG ¶¶ 31(f), 32(e), 
and footnotes 1 and 2. Because the President, in Executive Order 12968, intended to 
establish “a uniform Federal personnel security program” (Intro.), and required a 
“common set of adjudicative guidelines for determining eligibility for access to classified 
information” (Sec. 3.1(f).), the authority for these DoD modifications to the guidelines 
ended with the repeal of the Smith Amendment. The new statutory requirements are in 
effect and must be followed pending formal revision of the AG, but only the prohibition 
against granting clearances to unlawful drug users and addicts under AG H applies to 
“collateral” security clearances. Accordingly, the Smith Amendment-related provisions 
added to AG J have been repealed, and do not apply to the remaining proceedings in 
this case.     
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted that he is required to register as a sex offender until 
December 30, 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and denied the remaining SOR allegations in whole or 
in part.3 His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 39 years old (Tr. 7; GE 1). He has an associates degree and has 
earned several technology certifications (Tr. 7). Applicant met his future spouse in 1995 
(Tr. 51), and married her in 1997 (Tr. 51; GE 1). Their daughter was born in September 
2002 (Tr. 51; GE 1). He began his employment for a federal contractor in May 2007 (Tr. 
8; GE 1). He has never served in the military (GE 1). He is a senior data base analyst 
and programmer (Tr. 91).   
  
Criminal Conduct 
   
 In March 2002, a neighbor, who is a single mother, suggested that Applicant take 
her son on some errands because her son did not have any male influences in his life 
(GE 2 at 3). Applicant formed a friendly relationship with her son, who at that time was a 
15-year-old minor (Tr. 94). Applicant and the minor were together about twice a week, 
when they went to the gym or to Lowes (Tr. 95, 97). Applicant claimed the minor 
initiated several sexual discussions by jokingly raising the issue of masturbation (Tr. 
94). Applicant changed the subject to discourage the sexual conversations (Tr. 98). His 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.   
 
3Applicant’s SOR response is missing page 1; however, that page only contained his address (Tr. 
13-14). 
 
4                                                                                              
                                           
mother asked Applicant how to block her son from accessing pornographic websites 
using the family computer (Tr. 95).  
 
On August 27, 2002, Applicant and the minor went to Applicant’s residence (Tr. 
97). Applicant brought up the issue of circumcisions and the minor said he was not 
circumcised (Tr. 96-97; GE 2 at 4). Applicant asked the minor if he could see the 
minor’s penis (Tr. 97). The minor exposed himself and Applicant committed oral sodomy 
on the minor, who was then 15-years old (Tr. 97; GE 4). Applicant denied that he used 
force in connection with the sodomy (Tr. 109). Applicant’s wife was upstairs when he 
was committing the sodomy (Tr. 97). Initially Applicant denied that he knew what he had 
done with the minor was “inappropriate,” asserting that because Applicant was the 
victim of incest he did not know it was wrong (Tr. 99). He subsequently admitted he 
realized it was inappropriate at the time he committed the offense (Tr. 100).  
 
After the sodomy, Applicant continued to associate with the victim until March 
2003 (Tr. 100; GE 2 at 4). The victim attempted to extort Applicant into giving him a car 
by threatening to expose the sexual activity (Tr. 101). Applicant claimed he was more 
worried about the incest somehow coming out than what he had done to the minor (Tr. 
101-102). In August 2003, the minor informed the police of Applicant’s misconduct (GE 
2 at 4). 
  
 On October 14, 2004, Applicant was tried for committing forcible sodomy upon 
the minor (Tr. 104). Applicant testified at the trial that he masturbated the minor with his 
hand, and denied any sodomy (oral penetration of Applicant’s mouth by the minor’s 
penis) (Tr. 103). Applicant knew at the time that he was providing this testimony that it 
was false (Tr. 104). On October 14, 2004, Applicant was convicted of committing a 
crime against nature, consensual sodomy (GE 4). At his sentencing proceeding, 
Applicant disclosed his lie on the merits concerning the penetration issue (GE 2 at 5). 
The court sentenced him to be incarcerated for 12 months, to two years of post-release 
supervision, to be registered as a sex offender, and to a $2,500 fine (GE 4).  
 
 On May 16, 2007, Applicant told an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator that he lied about the sodomy, “because he was fearful of what would 
happen to his family, losing his wife, not seeing his daughter, losing his job, and not 
providing any health benefits for his family. [He] also recanted because of his guilt.” (GE 
2 at 5).  
 
 On July 20, 2005, Applicant entered an Alford plea4 to perjury (GE 3, 9). He was 
sentenced to be incarcerated for five years with 2 ½ years suspended, to run 
concurrently with his previous sentence (GE 3, 9). He also received two years of 
probation (GE 3, 9).   
   
 
4Under North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970), a judge may announce a finding of guilty, 
when a defendant enters a guilty plea and nevertheless makes a protestation of innocence. The 
defendant must also intelligently conclude that his or her interests require entry of a guilty plea and the 
record before the judge must contain strong evidence of actual guilt.  
 
 
5                                                                                              
Applicant is on probation until December 2009 (Tr. 37). He is not allowed to be 
alone with any minors, including his daughter (Tr. 39). 
 
 Applicant’s spouse, mother and father-in-law, roommates, employer, character 
references, and landlord are aware of the convictions (Tr. 106). The conviction was in 
the newspaper and disclosed at Applicant’s church (Tr. 107).  As a registered, convicted 
sex offender the information about his sexual offense is available on the internet (Tr. 
107). 
  
Applicant’s spouse’s information 
 
 Applicant’s spouse made a lengthy statement on his behalf (Tr. 49-90). When the 
sexual offense occurred, there was considerable stress in Applicant’s marriage because 
his spouse had two miscarriages and was concerned about her ongoing, difficult 
pregnancy (Tr. 51-52). His spouse was also unemployed in 2001 (Tr. 51). Their 
relationship became distant (Tr. 52). Six days after Applicant committed the sodomy, 
their daughter was born (Tr. 52-53). His spouse learned about the offense a year after 
he committed it, when the police approached him about the crime (Tr. 54, 78). He did 
not reveal the incest to her until the time of Applicant’s trial (Tr. 54-55). Before he 
committed the offenses, she trusted him and considered him a loving, caring person (Tr. 
77). 
 
After Applicant was confined, she had to sell their home because she could not 
afford the monthly payments. Moreover, there was tension in their neighborhood 
because the victim lived nearby (Tr. 56, 68). Her father, who was a former police officer, 
was very supportive of Applicant, and he even hired a detective to investigate the 
offense (Tr. 57). Applicant’s probation does not permit him to live in her residence (Tr. 
61). However, he is allowed to visit his daughter and has frequently done so (Tr. 71). 
Probation authorities have approved her as someone who can supervise Applicant’s 
visits with their daughter (Tr. 74).  
 
Applicant’s wife was present in court when he committed perjury. She thought he 
committed perjury because he was ashamed and did not want to admit the sexual 
conduct in front of ten or twelve children who were present in the courtroom (Tr. 68, 79).  
 
Before Applicant obtained employment or a place to live, he informed his 
prospective landlord and employer of his criminal convictions (Tr. 62, 65-66). He was 
open with family and friends concerning his convictions (Tr. 67). Applicant’s wife 
depicted Applicant as gentle, loving, caring, nonviolent, and mature (Tr. 58-59). She 
described him as a loving and supportive father and husband (Tr. 59). His therapy has 
increased his maturity, confidence and trustworthiness (Tr. 59, 70, 89). He is more 
assertive in group therapy and would not submit to coercion (Tr. 89). She did not 
believe he would offend in the future because he understood what he did was wrong 
and understood what triggered the offenses (Tr. 74, 80-81). She did not believe he was 
susceptible to extortion because of the offenses (Tr. 87).   
 
 
 
 
6                                                                                              
                                           
Other character evidence 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law has a law enforcement background and has investigated 
sexual crimes as a county police sergeant.5 He was aware of the circumstances 
underlying Applicant’s convictions. He considers Applicant to be truthful, and 
trustworthy. Applicant has good judgment.   
  
Applicant’s landlord and friend has known him for two years and described him 
as responsible, clean, helpful, and respectful (AE E). He is compliant with the rules of 
his probation and does not visit alone with minors (AE E). Applicant is a good citizen, 
has law-abiding character and shows integrity (AE E).  
 
A retired Army Colonel and West Point graduate, who is a licensed minister, 
provided an endorsement urging reinstatement of Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information (AE G). In 2004, he met Applicant during a weekly Bible study and they 
became friends (AE G). He opined Applicant had changed since 2008 and is now 
trustworthy, reliable and will comply with the law (AE G). Other friends described 
Applicant as family oriented, a hard worker, trustworthy, with strong integrity (AE H, I, 
K). Others had similar positive comments concerning Applicant’s law-abiding character 
and trustworthiness (AE J, L, M). 
 
Therapy 
 
Starting in the fall of 2003, Applicant has received therapy from Ms. N, a licensed 
clinical social worker in private practice, who specialized in the treatment of adult who 
experienced trauma in their childhood (Tr. 24-25, 47; AE A). Ms. N has a masters 
degree in Social Work and a wealth of private practice experience (Tr. 24, 47; AE A). 
Applicant is the only sex offender she is counseling (Tr. 43). Applicant pays for her 
counseling services (Tr. 43). Applicant received counseling from Ms. N about once a 
month, and then after his incarceration ended the meetings increased to once a week, 
until spring 2007, when his therapy sessions increased to twice a week (Tr. 26-27, 35).  
 
Ms. N determined Applicant was the victim of incest from his brother, who was 
ten years older, beginning when Applicant was six and continuing until he was in his 
twenties (Tr. 30-31). Applicant said he was sexually abused more than one thousand 
times (Tr. 113). Applicant initially viewed the molestation as normal; however, later he 
recognized the incest was not normal (Tr. 31). The molestation was kept secret from his 
parents while it was happening (Tr. 30-31). Applicant has never confronted his brother; 
however, he did confront his mother about the incest (Tr. 36).  Applicant’s family was 
not supportive and did not attend his trial (Tr. 44-45). 
 
Applicant told Ms. N that he committed oral sodomy on one occasion with a 
youth as described previously in the Criminal Conduct section of this decision (Tr. 31). 
Applicant thought the sexual activity with the victim was normal at the time he did it (Tr. 
33). During the course of therapy or perhaps when the victim was trying to extort 
Applicant, he recognized it was not normal (Tr. 34). 
 
5Applicant’s father-in-law’s written statement is the source for the facts in this paragraph (AE D). 
 
7                                                                                              
                                           
 
Ms. N thought Applicant’s perjury was “a desperate attempt to get himself out of 
the situation for a number of reasons and one being that he knew that his sexual abuse 
by his brother would become part of the story” (Tr. 41). Applicant scrupulously complies 
with the rules of his probation (Tr. 46). Ms. N predicted he would be honest about his 
behavior if questioned in court or a security context because he has learned about the 
consequences of not being forthright (Tr. 42). 
 
Applicant’s diagnosis is 300.4—dysthymia (Tr. 29).6 He also has a moderate 
underlying depression (Tr. 29). Applicant is now more mature and thoughtful (Tr. 28, 
47). He is not impulsive (Tr. 27). Although Applicant is her only source of information 
(Tr. 39), Ms. N concluded Applicant is dedicated to his employment and therapy (Tr. 27, 
48). He supports his wife and daughter (Tr. 28).  Applicant is a trustworthy person, who 
will not offend in a similar way in the future (Tr. 29, 48-49).  
 
Applicant completed the Sex Offender Awareness Program while he was 
incarcerated. He also receives weekly Sex Offender Treatment and counseling from Dr. 
G at a clinical center once a week in group therapy and once a month with his wife (Tr. 
26-27; GE 9). Applicant pays for the therapy with Dr. G (Tr. 73). Applicant eventually 
passed a sexual history polygraph (Tr. 108). In the polygraph, he denied that he used 
force, that there were other minor victims, that he viewed pornography, and that he was 
communicating with minors (Tr. 111). He also passed the polygraph on whether he was 
being truthful with his probation officer and therapist (Tr. 111). Applicant expressed 
remorse and was very sorry for what he had done (Tr. 129-130). 
 
Occupational history 
 
Applicant fully disclosed his offenses to employers and on his SF 85P (Tr. 117; 
GE 1; AE B, C). He also disclosed his need to attend therapy and meet other probation 
requirements (AE B). He is an innovative, diligent, hard-working employee, who often 
earned awards (Tr. 114, 120). Applicant was never unemployed, except while he was 
incarcerated (Tr. 114). Even when he was incarcerated, he taught inmates about 
computers and use of Microsoft office applications (Tr. 115). Applicant learned and 
matured while incarcerated and considered it a positive life experience (Tr. 116).  
 
Applicant loved his work in information technology, and contributed to his 
employer’s success (Tr. 116, 119). He showed integrity, professionalism and 
competence at work and his employer trusted him with very sensitive, government and 
contract information (Tr. 120-122; AE B, F). Applicant received respect and praise from 
his employer for several noteworthy contributions (Tr. 121-123; AE B, C, F). Fellow 
employees and his supervisor at the contractor believed Applicant was trustworthy and 
his work performance warranted a public trust position (AE B, C). 
 
 
6 A dysthymic disorder is essentially an emotional depression that persists for years of moderate 
or less than moderate intensity. See the diagnostic criteria for dysthymic disorder in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Copyright 1994 by the American Psychiatric 
Association (available at:  http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/disorders/dysd.htm). 
 
8                                                                                              
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
9                                                                                              
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance 
[or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant trustworthiness concern is under Guidelines D (Sexual 
Behavior) and J (Criminal Conduct).   
 
Sexual Behavior, Guideline D 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior stating: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four conditions relating to sexual behavior that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
 
10                                                                                             
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
Applicant admitted that he committed sodomy upon a 15-year-old minor. His 
conduct constitutes a felony. It does not make him vulnerable to coercion because he 
has been open to his family, employer, landlord, and others about his offense. He is a 
registered sex offender and his conduct is readily discoverable on the internet. There is 
no pattern of sexual behavior because Applicant committed one offense. AG ¶¶ 13(b) 
and 13(c) do not apply; however, AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(d) apply.     
 
AG ¶ 14 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
  
 AG ¶ 14(c) fully applies mitigating the sexual behavior. Applicant’s sexual offense 
is public information. He is a registered sexual offender and the information is available 
on the internet. He informed his family, employer and landlord of the sexual behavior. 
Accordingly, the sexual behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation 
or duress.  
 
The other three mitigating conditions do not apply. On August 27, 2002, 
Applicant committed the sexual behavior at issue, and at that time he was 32 years old. 
AG ¶ 14(a) does not apply because he was not an adolescent. The sodomy with a 
minor occurred more than six and a half years ago. He has served his incarceration and 
received extensive therapy. However, Applicant described years of incest by his older 
brother, and he was sexually abused more than 1000 times. Because of this extensive 
history of abuse, there is still a possibility of recurrence and AG ¶ 14(b) can only be 
partially applied. Applicant placed a minor’s penis into his mouth. The minor could not 
legally consent to the sexual activity and AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. 
 
Criminal Conduct, Guideline J 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to criminal conduct, 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 
11                                                                                             
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d) apply. Applicant was convicted of two felony-level 
offenses on October 14, 2004 (crime against nature) and July 20, 2005 (perjury). He 
admitted that he committed the two felonies. He was sentenced to substantial 
incarceration, fines and probation. He remains on probation at this time.   
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 32(c) clearly do not 
apply because he admitted the offenses and no one pressured him into committing the 
 
12                                                                                             
offenses. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are similar and are partially applicable. Applicant's 
most recent criminal offense occurred on October 14, 2004, about four and a half years 
ago. He served his sentence to incarceration and paid his fines. He presented strong 
evidence of remorse, job training, a good employment record and solid support from his 
employer, counselor, spouse, landlord, friends and father-in-law. A fairly lengthy period 
has elapsed after his most recent offense, and he has had time to contemplate his poor 
judgment and to respond to therapy.  
 
The therapy Applicant received is particularly noteworthy because Ms. N’s 
services were not court ordered. Applicant paid for Ms. N’s therapy on his own initiative. 
He also completed the Sex Offender Awareness Program while he was incarcerated. 
He receives weekly Sex Offender Treatment and counseling from Dr. G at a clinical 
center and once a month receives family counseling with his wife (Tr. 26-27; GE 9). His 
therapy and counseling have had a powerful salutary effect. He understands his 
criminal offenses had a devastating impact on his lifestyle, family and career. His 
demonstrated intent not to commit future crimes is encompassed in these two mitigating 
conditions. He has worked with information technology and has a good employment 
record. He sincerely accepted responsibility for his misconduct.  
 
However, Applicant’s criminal conduct cannot be fully mitigated at this time. He 
was a victim of years of sexual abuse. He was victimized more than 1000 times. The 
devastating abuse by his brother has increased the risk that Applicant will sexually 
abuse others, or commit other criminal offenses. He is still on probation and more 
progress is necessary to assure he is reliable, trustworthy and responsible to be given 
access to sensitive information.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance or public trust position by considering the 
totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance or public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines D and J in my whole person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some 
warrant additional comment. 
 
13                                                                                             
                                           
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. Applicant’s sexual offense occurred on August 27, 2002, which is six and a 
half years ago. His perjury offense was closely linked to the sodomy, as he committed 
perjury at his trial for committing sodomy upon a minor. He has not committed any 
offenses, since his perjury offense on October 14, 2004. He frankly and candidly 
admitted his two felonies on his SF 85P, to his employer, to his landlord, to his 
therapists, to his family, to an OPM investigator, and at his hearing. He knows the 
consequences of criminal offenses. He completed his incarceration and paid his fines. 
He has received years of one-on-one expert counseling, group therapy and family 
counseling, providing important mitigation of his sexual offense. Applicant significantly 
contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. There is no evidence at 
work of any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would 
intentionally violate national security or that he would fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. His character and good work performance show substantial responsibility, 
rehabilitation and mitigation. Other contractor employees, his supervisor, friends, family 
members and others support his continued access to sensitive information.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant was sexually abused more than 1000 times over more than ten years by his 
older brother. When he was 32 years old, he sexually abused a minor, sodomizing him 
while his wife, who was nine months pregnant, was upstairs. He then continued to 
attempt to manipulate the minor into not reporting the incident, holding out the possibility 
that Applicant would give the minor a car, when he turned 16. When he went to trial on 
October 14, 2004, he committed perjury, and failed to take full responsibility for what he 
had done. He is currently on probation and is registered as a sex offender. Under the 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence, his two felonies cannot be considered individually, and 
must be analyzed in combination with each other. His two felonies cannot be mitigated 
at this time. His criminal offenses were knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He 
was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. These two crimes show 
an extreme lack of judgment and a failure to abide by the law. Such conduct raises a 
serious trustworthiness concern, and access to sensitive information is not warranted at 
this time. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct. Sexual behavior is mitigated because it 
is not recent.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
14                                                                                             
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy an ADP I/II/III position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
