KEYWORD: Guideline J
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record
evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-00632
DATE: 03/02/2009
DATE: March 2, 2009
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-00632
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 14, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department
Applicant Exhibit E, DD Form 214, reflects that Applicant retired from the Air Force after 21 years of service.1
10 U.S.C. § 815.  2
2
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On December 23, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were supported by substantial record evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is field engineer for a
defense contractor.  He was honorably discharged from the Air Force in 2000.   While on active1
duty, in the mid-1980s, Applicant “[o]n two or three occasions . . . entered the shower area of the
female barracks . . . for the purpose of secretly watching women take showers.”  Decision at 3.  He
subsequently received nonjudicial punishment under Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice
(UCMJ.)   The punishment consisted of a suspended reduction in grade, forfeiture of $200 pay per2
month for two months, and thirty days of correctional custody.  In October 2005, after his retirement
from active duty, Applicant was arrested on an Air Force base for the offenses of invasion of privacy
(looking into the window of a female’s on-base guestroom without her knowledge) and resisting
arrest.  He pled guilty to invasion of privacy and the second charge was dropped.  He was fined $375.
After the case, Applicant attended a fellowship sponsored by his church, the content of which
was sexual contact temptations.  It did not specifically address voyeurism, nor was it part of a court-
ordered treatment program.  Among other things, the program addressed ways of avoiding such
temptations.  Applicant discussed his misconduct with his fellow attendees.  Applicant’s supervisors
and fellow workers rate his job performance highly.  In evaluating Applicant’s documentary
evidence of good character, the Judge stated that these documents do not reflect that the persons
writing them were aware of Applicant’s misconduct.    
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”) Applicant argues that the Judge mistakenly believed that the
church program he attended was mandatory rather than voluntary.  However, neither the record nor
the Judge’s decision provides a basis to conclude that the Judge erred in his treatment of this matter.
The Judge found that Applicant’s testimony concerning this program was confusing, citing, for
example, Applicant’s apparently contradictory statements as to whether he had informed his fellow
congregants of his conviction.  The record provides no basis to conclude that the Judge mis-weighed
the evidence.  See ISCR Case No. 08-07005 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009) (“As the trier of fact, the
3
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa”). The facts and circumstances of the fellowship meeting,
contradictory testimony by Applicant concerning it, and Applicant’s demeanor while testifying are
proper matters for the Judge to consider, both as to a credibility determination and to the question
of rehabilitation.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32 (The Board defers to the Judge’s credibility
determinations); and Directive ¶ E2.32 (d) (Guideline J security concerns can be mitigated by an
Applicant’s demonstrating that “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation”).  
The record demonstrates that the Judge has considered the entire record, including the matters
submitted by Applicant.  The Judge has drawn a rational connection between the facts found and his
ultimate adverse security clearance decision, both as regards the mitigating conditions and the whole-
person factors.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  See also Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that
“it is not clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision at 8.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security’”).  The Board has no authority to extend
Applicant’s security clearance until the beginning of the next year due to national economic
conditions, as requested by Applicant.  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
