1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-05265
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 2, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on September 14, 2007.  On October 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines E and F for Applicant.  The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 6, 2008.  He answered
the SOR in writing on November 24, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on December 1, 2008, and I
received the case assignment on January 5, 2009.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing
that same day, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 22, 2009.  The
2
Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 7, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit (AppX) A, without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 3, 2009.  I granted
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 5, 2009, to submit additional
matters.  On or about January 29, 2009, he submitted Exhibit B, without objection. The
record closed on February 6, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations of the
SOR, with explanations.  He also provided additional information to support his request
for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The Applicant had been employed in the defense sector with a security clearance
for about 30 years (TR at page 20 line 13 to page 23 line 12).  However, in February of
2006, he lost his job, and was rehired on a less than full time basis, in April or May of
2006 (TR at page 42 line 22 to page 44 line 10).  This has caused the Applicant
financial difficulties (Id).
In November of 2008, the Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 7
Bankruptcy (TR at page 34 line 22 to page 35 line 15, and AppX B at page 7).
However, the Applicant’s mother-in-law had passed away in September of 2008, and he
and his spouse are now awaiting the disposition of her estate, before their bankruptcy
petition can be finalized (TR at page 30 line 25 to page 32 line 22).  His spouse may
inherit as much as $90,000, which would exceed the total of $49,254 in unsecured
debts filed in his bankruptcy (Id, and AppX B at page 30).
1.a.  The first debt is to creditor #1 in the past due amount of about $2,450 (TR at
page 29 line 19 to page 30 line 25, and GX 8 at page 2).  This debt is included in
Applicant’s Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, as evidenced by its Schedule F at page 2.
1.b.  The second debt is to creditor #2 in the past due amount of about $1,683
(TR at page 32 line 23 to page 33 line 4, and GX 8 at page 2).  This debt is included in
Applicant’s Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, as evidenced by its Schedule F at page 1.
1.c.  The third debt is to creditor #3 in the past due amount of about $4,357 (TR
at page 33 lines 5~20, and GX 6 at page 2).  This debt is included in Applicant’s
Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, as evidenced by its Schedule F at page 2.
1.d.  The fourth debt is to creditor #4 in the past due amount of about $200 (TR
at page 33 line 21 to page 34 line 4, and GX 8 at page 2).  This debt is included in
Applicant’s Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, as evidenced by its Schedule F at page 2.
3
1.e.  The fifth debt is to creditor #5 in the past due amount of about $2,370 (TR at
page 34 lines 5~14, and GX 8 at page 3).  This debt is included in Applicant’s Chapter 7
Bankruptcy, as evidenced by its Schedule F at page 3.
1.f.  The last debt is to creditor #6 in the past due amount of about $1,037 (TR at
page 34 lines 15~21, and GX 6 at page 3).  This debt is included in Applicant’s Chapter
7 Bankruptcy, as evidenced by its Schedule F at page 3.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
2.a.  The Applicant was less than candid when he answered Section 28 on his
September 2007 e-QIP (TR at page 38 line 7 to page 40 line 17, and GX 1 at pages
30~31).  He checked the “No” boxes, as to having any debts more that 90 or 180 days
past due, in the last seven years ( GX 1 at pages 30~31).  He answered these
questions falsely, as he was in “[f]ear of keeping his job” (TR at page 39 lines 19~22).  I
find this to be a wilful falsification.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
4
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has at least five past due debts that
he has been unable to address in a timely fashion.  The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Subparagraph 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ The Applicant has included all of his alleged past due debts in
his filing for the protection of a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy.  He is awaiting the probate of his
mother-in-law’s estate before this petition can be finalized.  If he and his spouse receive
5
more than $50,000 from her estate, the petition will be dropped and the past due debts
will be paid.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
Disqualifying Condition under Subparagraph 16(a) applies.  It provides that the
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire . . . or similar form used to conduct investigations . . . ” may be
disqualifying.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating Condition here, as Applicant
falsified his e-QIP for fear of losing his job.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  His former supervisor speaks most
highly of the Applicant (AppX A).
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns arising from his Personal Conduct. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
