 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09340 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 28, 2008 (Government Exhibit (GX) 5). On December 22, 2008, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security 
concerns under Guideline F (GX 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on January 5, 2009; answered it on January 15, 
2009; and requested determination on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on February 4, 2009. On February 5, 
2009, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, 
who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 12, 2009, and he timely submitted three documents on March 12, 2009. The 
case was assigned to me on March 26, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c. 
His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old data entry technician employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since March 2008. He previously 
worked for a private company as an equipment operator from February 1995 to July 
2004, and as a warehouse foreman in Kuwait from July 2004 to December 2007. He 
has never held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s e-QIP reflects that he has been married since November 2005 and 
has no children. It also reflects a previous marriage in November 1990, but it does not 
reflect the date of his divorce (GX 1 at 21). 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, totaling $16,038, are being 
handled by a debt settlement program. Applicant has made one payment of $375 to the 
attorney handling his program. The payment was due on December 21, 2008, but was 
made two days later (GX 4 at 4-6; GX 6 at 6). There is no evidence of subsequent 
payments in January or February 2009. 
 
 The delinquent debt for $5,352, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, arose when Applicant co-
signed a car loan for his ex-brother-in-law, who failed to make the payments. The car 
was repossessed (GX 4 at 7-10). In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a copy 
of an email exchange in which his ex-brother-in-law acknowledged responsibility for the 
debt and promised to start making “minor payments” as soon as he starts working. 
There is no evidence that any payments have been made or that the ex-brother-in-law 
has started working. 
 
 The delinquent debt for $34,981, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, arose from a home 
mortgage that was foreclosed. The court records in the FORM reflect that no deficiency 
was assessed against Applicant. Department Counsel conceded the debt was satisfied 
by the foreclosure sale. 
 
 A personal financial statement submitted by Applicant in response to DOHA 
interrogatories reflects a net monthly household income of $4,338, expenses of $2,198, 
 3
debt payments of $839, and a net remainder of $1,301 (GX 6 at 4). The debts alleged in 
the SOR are not included in the personal financial statement. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 4
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totalling $56,371. The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ 
AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.@ The 
evidence reflects that the delinquent home mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was satisfied 
by the foreclosure sale, and I have resolved that allegation in Applicant’s favor. I have 
considered the foreclosure, however, in determining whether Applicant has “a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” I conclude that Applicant’s financial history raises AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and (c), shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s debts are 
multiple and not yet resolved. With the possible exception of the car loan, they did not 
occur under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. All the debts, including the car 
loan, cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
 5
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. The failure of Applicant’s ex-
brother-in-law to make payments on the car loan was a circumstance beyond his 
control. It appears that Applicant reacted responsibly when he learned about the 
delinquent debt, by contacting the creditor and his ex-brother-in-law to find out what 
happened. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the car loan but not for the other 
delinquent debts.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has engaged a lawyer and enrolled in a debt settlement program, but the program does 
not include the delinquent car loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Furthermore, Applicant has not 
established a track record of timely payments under the program. He responded to the 
FORM in March 2009, but he submitted no evidence that he made the January and 
February payments due under the program. I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is not established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). I conclude this mitigating condition is not 
established. Applicant has not established a record of compliance with his debt 
settlement program. No payments have been made on the delinquent car loan. The 
delinquent mortgage was not resolved through any voluntary action by Applicant, but 
rather by involuntary foreclosure and sale of the house. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
 6
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult with a steady employment record. He has offered no 
explanation for his inability to make his home mortgage payments. His financial history 
raises doubt whether he will comply with his debt settlement program. He has not 
established a track record of financial responsibility. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based 
on his financial history. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
