KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record
evidence.  The errors contained in the “Summary of Pleadings” section of the decision do not
impugn the sufficiency of the Judge’s findings of fact. The Judge considered the wife in the
context of Applicant’s in-laws, who are citizens and residents of Iran. There is a rebuttable
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family
members of the person’s spouse. Applicant challenges the Judge’s weighing of the mitigating
evidence. The weighing of the evidence is within a Judge’s discretion and will not be disturbed
by the Board absent a showing that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law, or not supported by the record as a whole. There is no
such showing here. Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 08-01282.a1
DATE: 03/30/2009
DATE: March 30, 2009
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-01282
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline C are not at issue in this appeal.  1
2
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Susan Mary Rotkis, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 14, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 12, 2009, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact are supported by substantial record evidence; whether the Judge erred in admitting certain
official notice documents; and whether the Judge erred in failing to mitigate the Guideline B security
concerns in his case.   Finding no harmful error, we affirm.1
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an information
technology manager.  He was born and raised in Iran.  He attended college in the U.S., graduating
in the mid-1980s.  About the same time, he received permanent resident status.  Applicant became
a U.S. citizen in the early 1990s.  He renewed his Iranian passport in the late 1990s upon discovering
that he would need it to travel to Iran.  He has since let it expire.  Applicant’s wife was born in Iran.
She met Applicant in the late 1990s during a trip to another country.  She immigrated to the U.S. on
a “fiancé visa.”  She and Applicant were married shortly thereafter.  Applicant’ wife’s parents are
citizens and residents of Iran who have applied to immigrate to the U.S.  Applicant’s wife talks with
her parents monthly, while Applicant speaks with them every three months.  Applicant has traveled
to Iran twice since becoming a U.S. citizen, the second time along with his wife for the purpose of
having a formal wedding.  Applicant’s wife made a trip to Iran in the late 2000s to visit her parents.
She used her Iranian passport for travel and retains the option of renewing it should circumstances
require a return to Iran.  The U.S. does not have diplomatic relations with Iran, which has committed
serious human rights violations in recent years.  Iran does not recognize dual nationals, treating them
as Iranian citizens.  Persons of Iranian birth who have become U.S. citizens risk detention absent
“persuasive proof of their formal renunciation or loss of their Iranian citizenship[.]”  Decision at 8
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”) The errors contained in the “Summary of Pleadings” section
of the decision do not impugn the sufficiency of the Judge’s findings of fact.  Viewed in light of the
record as a whole, any errors in the Judge’s findings are harmless.   See ISCR 01-23362 at 2 (App.
“[U]pon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about his wife’s strong relationships with her parents,2
[wife’s] own accounts of her visits and regular contacts with her parents residing in Iran, and [wife’s] continued access
to her parents through her retained Iranian passport, risks of undue foreign influence on Applicant, his wife and her
family members residing in Iran cannot be safely discounted.”  Decision at 13.   
3
Bd. Jun. 5, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-09915 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2004); ISCR Case No. 01-11192
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2002).  Applicant argues on appeal that the Judge erred in assigning
security significance to Applicant’s wife, since she was not the subject of a SOR allegation.
However, the Judge considered the wife in the context of Applicant’s in-laws, who are citizens and
residents of Iran.  “[I]n-laws represent a class of persons who are contemplated by the Directive as
presenting a potential security risk.  As a matter of common sense and human experience, there is
a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family
members of the person’s spouse.”  ISCR Case No. 03-26176 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2005). 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s weighing of the mitigating evidence, which Applicant
characterizes as “overwhelming.”  The weighing of the evidence is within a Judge’s discretion and
will not be disturbed by the Board absent a showing that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law, or not supported by the record as a whole.  See, e.
g., ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2007).  There is no such showing here.  
 The Board finds no error in the manner in which the Judge addressed security concerns
arising out of Applicant’s in-laws.   After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge2
examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a
‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of
the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “[it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance” is
sustainable on this record.  Decision at 16.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security’”). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
