 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-03327 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On June 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2008, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s written case on January 13, 2009. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on January 26, 2009. He responded with a letter dated 
February 23, 2009, and six attachments. Department Counsel did not object to his 
response. The attachments are marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) AA through FF using 
the lettering provided by Applicant. The case was assigned to me on March 9, 2009. I 
asked Department Counsel to contact Applicant to provide him the opportunity to submit 
additional documentation. Applicant submitted a fax cover sheet with four attached 
documents. The four attached documents are marked AE A through D. The fax cover 
sheet is marked AE E. AE A through E and AA through FF are admitted. Department 
Counsel’s memorandum is marked File Exhibit (FE) I.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a Bachelor 
of Science degree in computer science awarded in 2000. He has worked for the same 
employer since shortly after he graduated college. He and his wife married while he was 
in college. They have two children, ages 12 and 7.1  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $20,898. Applicant admitted all the 
allegations, with the exception of the $2,529 and $563 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.f. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a 
security clearance.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial issues to a period of financial hardships in 2005 
and 2006, when his family’s expenses began to exceed their income. His wife handled 
the finances and neither of them had a complete grasp of their financial situation. They 
juggled payments for several months but then permitted other debts to go unpaid in an 
effort to catch up on their mortgage payments. Their finances eventually stabilized. 
Applicant borrowed $15,500 from his 401(k) in May 2008, in order to repay his 
delinquent debts.2 Individual debts are addressed below. 
 
 Applicant admitted owing a delinquent debt of $2,440 to a collection company 
collecting on behalf of a bank, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He stated in his response to the 
SOR that he reached a settlement with another collection company that obtained the 
debt, and that the debt would be reported as paid in full by July 31, 2008. Documents 
from the collection company showed the balance of the debt at exactly $2,440.25. 
Applicant reported in his response to the FORM that the debt was paid in full. The debt 
was removed from his credit reports. He submitted additional documentation showing 
that $2,440.25 was withdrawn from his checking account on July 30, 2008. Applicant 
has submitted sufficient documentation to prove that this debt has been paid in full.3 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 5; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A-E. 
 
3 Items 3, 5; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A-E, AA, BB. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a debt of $2,713 to a collection company collecting a debt on 
behalf of a department store. The balance on the debt had risen to $3,172 as of 
February 2009. Applicant settled the debt in full for $1,650 on February 10, 2009.4 
 
 Applicant owed $12,603 to a collection company collecting a debt on behalf of a 
financial institution, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He stated in his response to the FORM 
that the debt was settled in full. The debt was removed from his credit reports but the 
response did not contain documentation from the creditor that the debt was paid. He 
submitted additional documentation showing that $7,545.15 was withdrawn from his 
checking account on July 30,  2008. Applicant has submitted sufficient 
documentation to prove that this debt has been settled in full.5 
 
 The debt of $2,529 to a collection company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, is a 
duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.6 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $50 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but stated 
the debt was paid in full. The debt is not listed on the four most recent credit reports in 
evidence. I find this debt has been paid.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a debt of $563 to a collection company, on behalf of a 
telephone services provider. Applicant provided a copy of a letter sent to the telephone 
services company disputing the amount of the debt. He submitted a letter from the 
telephone company dated February 16, 2009, adjusting the balance of his account by 
$237. The letter also noted that the company received a payment of $326 from 
Applicant on February 13, 2009, and there was a zero balance on the account.8 
 
 Applicant has not received formal financial counseling but he enlisted the aid of 
family, friends, and co-workers in working out a new method of handling family finances. 
About two years ago, Applicant and his wife sat down and performed a “what went 
wrong” analysis and identified the key factors that went into their situation, one being 
the lack of communication about their finances, and the other being the lack of a 
concrete budget. They worked out a comprehensive, flexible, long-term family budget 
and he reports that it has worked out very well for them. He has not incurred new 
delinquent debts in several years. His financial situation is now well in order.9 
 
 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s response to FORM; AE CC. 
 
5 Items 3, 5; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A-E, AA, BB. 
 
6 Items 3, 5-8; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE AA, BB. 
 
7 Items 3, 5-8; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE AA, BB. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to FORM; AE EE, FF. 
 
9 Items 3, 5; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline lists several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of the 
above potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Three mitigating conditions under ¶¶ 20(c) through 20(e) are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has resolved all his financial issues. The debts that were his 
responsibility have been paid or settled in full. He has not received formal financial 
counseling but he turned to others for advice in handling his finances. He is now 
financially solvent. Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay his overdue 
creditors. His financial problems have been resolved and are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) are applicable.  
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable to that part of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f that was adjusted in 
Applicant’s favor by the creditor.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
     
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 32 years old. He 
married while he was in college and he has two children. He obtained his current job 
shortly after he graduated college. It is clear that he let his finances slip away from him 
for a period. His wife was mostly handling the finances and neither one of them had a 
full grasp of their situation. Debts became delinquent. About two years ago, he and his 
wife sat down, talked about what went wrong, and developed a comprehensive plan and 
budget for correcting the situation. He has resolved all his delinquent debt and has not 
accrued any new delinquent debt in several years. Applicant has clearly matured in the 
last several years. His finances are now in very good shape.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
