                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-02414
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 27, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on August 27, 2007.  On October 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR soon thereafter.  He answered the
SOR in writing on November 25, 2008, and requested an Administrative Determination
by an Administrative Judge.  Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material
(FORM) on January 8, 2009.  The Applicant did not respond to the FORM.  Based upon
a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 25, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations of all the Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Applicant was unemployed from March~June of 1999 (Item 3 at page 5).
When he was re-employed, his pay was substantially less (Id).  This caused him to have
financial difficulties (Item 3 at page 5).
The SOR alleges ten past due or charged off debts.  They will be addressed in
the order they are listed.
1.a.  The first debt is a charged off credit card account in the amount of about
$5,476 (Item 5 at page 7).  The Applicant avers that he is “[i]n 3  party negotiations”rd
regarding this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at pages 7~8).  I find that
this debt remains outstanding.
1.b.  The second debt is past due to a bank in the amount of about $2,582 (Item
5 at page 5).  The Applicant again avers that he is “[i]n 3  party negotiations” regardingrd
this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at pages 3~4).  I find that this debt
remains outstanding.
1.c.  The third debt is past due to the same bank in the amount of about $1,522
(Item 5 at page 5).  The Applicant avers that he is “[i]n 3  party negotiations” regardingrd
this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at pages 4~5).  I find that this debt
remains outstanding.
1.d.  The fourth debt is a delinquent debt to another bank in the amount of about
$468 (Item 5 at page 7).  The Applicant avers that he is also “[i]n 3  party negotiations”rd
regarding this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at pages 5~6).  I find that
this debt remains outstanding.
1.e.  The fifth debt is a charged off gasoline credit card account in the amount of
about $1,282 (Item 5 at page 4).  The Applicant avers that he is “[i]n 3  partyrd
negotiations” regarding this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at pages
6~7).  I find that this debt remains outstanding.
1.f.  The sixth debt is a collection account to a third bank in the amount of about
$3,204 (Item 5 at page 3).  The Applicant avers that he has “acquired a credit
consular(sic) to negotiate” this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at page 2).
I find that this debt remains outstanding.
1.g.  The seventh debt is a delinquent debt to a fourth bank in the amount of
about $1,764 (Item 5 at page 3).  The Applicant avers that he is “[i]n 3  partyrd
negotiations” regarding this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at page 6).  I
find that this debt remains outstanding.
3
1.h.  The eighth debt is a collection account to a utility company in the amount of
about $6,170 (Item 5 at page 8).  The Applicant avers that he is “[i]n the process of 3rd
party negotiations” regarding this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at page
3).  I find that this debt remains outstanding.
1.i.  The ninth debt is a collection account for another gasoline credit card
account in the amount of about $1,734 (Item 5 at page 6).  The Applicant avers that he
is “[i]n the process of 3  party negotiations” regarding this debt, but has providedrd
nothing further (Item 4 at pages 4).  I find that this debt remains outstanding.
1.j.  The last debt is a collection account to another utility company in the amount
of about $347 (Item 5 at page 3).  The Applicant avers that he is “[i]n 3  partyrd
negotiations” regarding this debt, but has provided nothing further (Item 4 at page 5).  I
find that this debt remains outstanding.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the Applicant is responsible “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
4
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG Subparagraph19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Subparagraph 20(b), states that it
may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, . . .), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Here, the Applicant was unemployed in
1999, and was later employed with a substantial cut in pay; but, other than evidenced
by his bare averments in response to the Government’s interrogatories, he has done
little to address his very substantial past due indebtedness.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
5
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his Financial
Considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
_________________
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
Administrative Judge
