                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 08-03418 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2007, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 
85P).1 On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleged security concerns under 
 
1  Item 5.  
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a public trust position for her, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a public trust 
position should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On October 27, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 17, 2008, was provided to her, 
and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.4 A response to the FORM was due on December 25, 2008. 
Applicant did not submit any additional information for consideration. The case was 
assigned to me on February 10, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 
1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., and 1.k. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 
1.i., and 1.l. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old service representative.5 She attended business college 
from March 1991 to November 1991. She married in July 1988, and has three children, 
ages 19, 17, and 10. She and her husband have been “separated for many years” and 
she currently receives intermittent child support from her husband. Her SF 85P states 
she has been separated from her husband since April 2000. Her Response to SOR 
does not contain specific details regarding the amounts of child she receives or does 
not receive.6 
 
Applicant disclosed no police record; no use of illegal drugs; and no alcohol-
related problems, counseling or treatment. She has worked for the same employer, a 
government contractor, since July 2007. Applicant indicated she has held access to 
sensitive information since she began her present position. Her access has never been 
suspended or revoked. 
 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 The DOHA transmittal letter is dated November 17, 2008. Applicant signed the receipt for the 
DOHA transmittal letter on November 24, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after receipt of the FORM to submit information. 
 
5 Item 5, July 2007 SF 85P, is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
6 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
In her 2007 SF 85P, Applicant disclosed several past due accounts, including a 
$9,354 student loan that had gone to collections in 1992. Additionally, her background 
investigation addressed her financial problems and included the review of credit reports 
from August 2007, April 2008, September 2008, and November 2008.7 Also, it 
considered Applicant’s answer to DOHA interrogatories.8  
 
The DOHA interrogatories asked Applicant, in part, to explain and/or document 
the status of 12 delinquent accounts, totaling $30,964.00 alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
responded that a credit counseling service she consulted advised “that I could file for 
bankruptcy but I have decided after further review I will be working w/a credit attorney.” 
She also referred to an unspecified illness and a disability. She did not provide specific 
information regarding the nature, quality, or duration of her illness/disability and how 
that may have impacted her ability to pay her debts.  
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM failed to address her indebtedness in any 
meaningful way. She provided little or no information as to how she acquired the debts, 
why they became delinquent, documented efforts she has taken to resolve her debts, 
and what measures she has taken to avoid similar financial problems in the future. Her 
plan is to resolve her indebtedness through “credit repair with a credit attorney.”  
 
Applicant asserts that she is an honest person and a loyal U.S. citizen, who 
would never do anything to harm the interests of the U.S. She stated she is doing her 
best to raise three children on her own. She provided three character reference letters. 
All three authors spoke of Applicant’s good character, work ethic, and trustworthiness. 
She also provided a copy of her Performance Management and Individual Growth Plan 
(position description).9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
7 Items 9, 8, 7, and 6, respectively. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”10 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).11 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
10  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is addressed by Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her SF 85P, her credit reports, 
her answers to DOHA interrogatories, and her SOR response.  
 
Applicant provided no persuasive evidence that she has paid, settled or 
otherwise resolved the 12 debts totaling $30,964 alleged. Her debts have been ongoing 
as demonstrated by her credit reports. For example, her $9,354 student loan became 
past due in 1992. The 12 debts alleged in her SOR are substantiated by Applicant’s 
admissions and/or evidence presented. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,12 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s sparse favorable information fails to raise the 
applicability of any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Applicant has not dealt responsibly with her financial obligations before, or 
especially after receipt of the SOR. Based on her security clearance application, 
Applicant has continuously worked for her current employer since July 2007. She 
presented little or no evidence to show paid debts, settlements, documented 
negotiations, payment plans, budgets, or financial assistance/counseling. It is unclear 
when her last payments were made on any of these 12 delinquent debts. Considering 
the record as a whole, I conclude these12 debts, totaling about $30,964.00 are still 
valid, delinquent debts, and that Applicant is responsible for them.  
 
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that 
she has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that she has taken 
control of her financial situation. Based on the available evidence, her financial 
problems are recent, not isolated, and are likely to be a concern in the future. She has 
not carried her burden of showing that any of the Guideline F mitigating conditions 
apply. Her overall financial behavior casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
12  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
7 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG  ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s record of employment for a government contractor weighs in her 
favor. She has had access to sensitive information since at least July 2007. There is no 
evidence of any security violation. Aside from her delinquent debts (which is a civil, non-
criminal issue), she is a law-abiding citizen. These factors show some responsibility and 
mitigation. She is well regarded by her superiors and co-workers. 
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. She has 
a significant history of delinquent debt that goes back to at least 1992. Applicant has 
had access to sensitive information since July 2007. As such, she was or should have 
been well aware of her financial responsibilities, and that her failure to be financially 
responsible would raise security clearance concerns.  
 
In fairness to the Applicant, this decision should not be construed as a 
determination that she cannot or will not attain the state of financial stability necessary 
to justify the award of a DoD security clearance. Should Applicant be afforded an 
opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, she may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude she has not mitigated the public trust concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
