 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08068 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct), based on cocaine use and failure to disclose 
an arrest for a felony and a drug offense in an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) and a response to interrogatories. Applicant refuted 
the allegation that she intentionally failed to disclose the felony arrest, but she did not 
mitigate the security concerns based on her cocaine use. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 9, 2008. On 
November 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 11, 2008; answered it on November 
18, 2008; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA 
received the request on November 21, 2008. Department Counsel requested a hearing 
and was ready to proceed on January 29, 2009. The case was assigned to me on 
January 30, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 6, 2009, scheduling 
the hearing for February 24, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. GX 6 was 
marked as an exhibit but was not offered or admitted. Applicant testified on her own 
behalf. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing on February 24, 2009. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 2, 2009. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of three sections of the state criminal code defining 
the crime of burglary. The documents setting out the applicable provisions of the state 
criminal code were not admitted in evidence but are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HX) I, II and III. The provisions of the state criminal code that were 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Uncharged Misconduct 
 
 Department Counsel presented evidence that Applicant falsely denied illegal 
drug use when she submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions (SF 85) in 
September 2007. This conduct was not alleged in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the 
SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to evaluate an applicant=s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an 
applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to decide whether a particular 
provision of the adjudicative guidelines is applicable; or in the whole person analysis. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). Additionally, 
an administrative judge may consider security concerns not alleged in the SOR when 
they are relevant and factually related to a disqualifying condition that was alleged. 
ISCR 05-01820 at 3 n.4 (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-18860 at 8 
(App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2003) and ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003)). I 
have considered Applicant’s falsification of her SF 85 for the limited purposes of 
determining her credibility, evaluating evidence of rehabilitation, and in my whole person 
analysis. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations of drug 
involvement, but she denied intentionally concealing her arrest record. Her admissions 
in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old integration and test technician employed by a federal 
contractor. She has worked for her current employer since August 1999. She is married 
and has two sons, ages 16 and 12. She has never held a clearance. 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions (SF 85) on 
September 4, 2007, and she answered “no” to the question whether she had used 
illegal drugs during the last year (GX 3 at 3). In a response to DOHA interrogatories 
dated September 27, 2008, Applicant admitted that she used cocaine once in July 2007, 
about two months before she submitted her SF 85. She also admitted using cocaine 
once in June 2008 (GX 2 at 2). In response to DOHA’s question about her intentions 
regarding future use and frequency, she wrote “none.”  
 
 Applicant testified that she was unaware of the sensitivity of the questions when 
she submitted her SF 85. She testified she did not feel it was necessary to disclose her 
cocaine use because she believed the questionnaire was simply a background check 
(Tr. 50). 
 
When Applicant submitted her e-QIP in April 2008, she disclosed that she used 
cocaine about six times between July 2003 and June 2007. She explained that her 
instances of cocaine use were “isolated incidents that occurred at a few social 
gatherings.” She stated, “I have learned from this experience and have not used this 
substance since June 2007” (GX 1 at 29).  
 
At the hearing, she testified she told a security investigator in May 2008 that she 
did not intend to use illegal drugs again (Tr. 57). She also admitted that she used 
cocaine in June 2008, about two months after submitting her e-QIP and one month after 
declaring her intention to not use illegal drugs again (Tr. 59). At the hearing, she 
testified she does not intend to use drugs again (Tr. 89). 
 
Applicant testified that she used cocaine with her friends about once a year. It 
usually occurred when someone offered it and she would take “a couple of sniffs just to 
stay there and keeping going for a little while longer.” She does not believe she is 
addicted, and she has never entered a treatment program (Tr. 37-38, 63). She testified 
she has not used cocaine or any other illegal drug since June 2008 (Tr. 60). She has 
been in situations where cocaine was offered, and she has declined (Tr. 62). She 
continues to associate with the friends with whom she has used cocaine (Tr. 62, 70-71). 
Her husband knows about her cocaine use, but her sons do not (Tr. 75). 
 
When Applicant submitted her e-QIP, she answered “no” to six questions about 
her police record, including questions whether she had ever been charged with or 
convicted of a felony or any offenses related to alcohol or drugs; and whether in the last 
seven years she had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses not 
listed in the other questions (GX 1 at 28). In a response to DOHA interrogatories five 
months after she submitted her e-QIP, she stated she was arrested in July 1983 for 
trespassing, and the charges were disposed of by placing her on probation before 
judgment (GX 2 at 5).  
 
4 
 
 
 
State criminal records reflect that on August 14, 1983, five days before 
Applicant’s 19th birthday, she was charged with breaking and entering with intent to 
murder, theft, trespassing on posted property, and unlawful possession of a controlled 
substance. The records reflect that a bail bond hearing was held on August 15, 1983, 
and all charges were dismissed on September 27, 1983 (GX 4 at 3). 
 
Applicant testified her arrest occurred when she and a group of four friends were 
boating, and they docked at a private pier. Applicant and a friend asked “a couple of 
gentlemen” if they could use the bathroom in the waterfront home adjacent to the pier. 
According to Applicant, the gentlemen did not respond. Applicant and her friend 
approached the house, noticed that the door was ajar, knocked on the door, and called 
out, “Is anybody home?” No one responded, and they entered the house, wandered 
around for a short time, and left the house after they could not find the bathroom (Tr. 
66). 
 
As they left, the police had arrived and were arresting three of Applicant’s friends 
who had remained at the pier, and they also arrested Applicant and her friend who had 
entered the house with her (Tr. 40). One of the persons arrested was her now-husband 
(Tr. 45). Applicant and her friends were jailed. Applicant’s brother refused to post bail for 
her, and she remained in jail for two days until her mother posted bail (Tr. 46, 77). She 
remembered that the experience was “very scary.” It was her first and only arrest (Tr. 
67-69). She denied possessing marijuana on her person at the time of her arrest, and 
there are no records documenting the basis for this charge. She testified she could not 
remember much about the court proceedings, except that the judge told her and her 
friends that they would be on probation before judgment for a year (Tr. 46).  
 
As requested by department counsel, I have taken administrative notice of the 
current state criminal code sections pertaining to three degrees of offenses involving 
breaking and entering a residence. All three degrees of breaking and entering are 
felonies. The state criminal code was redrafted and reorganized after Applicant’s arrest. 
The offenses are now captioned as burglary, which is defined as the breaking and 
entering of the dwelling of another. The words “with intent to murder” reflected on the 
state criminal records do not appear in the criminal code sections administratively 
noticed, but the revised code contains a requirement that the breaking and entering be 
with intent to commit a criminal offense. Recognizing that the criminal code has been 
changed since Applicant’s arrest, I have limited my administrative notice to the fact that 
breaking and entering a residence with intent to commit murder was a felony at the time 
of Applicant’s arrest. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
5 
 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The SOR alleges Applicant used cocaine approximately eight times from July 
2003 to June 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and she has admitted using it about six times. AG ¶ 24 
expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: “Use of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
“Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled 
Substances Act of 1970, as amended.” AG ¶ 24(a)(1). Drug abuse is defined as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” AG ¶ 24(b). Cocaine is listed in Schedule II of the Controlled 
Substances Act. 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany drug abuse,@ and 
Aillegal drug possession,” and “failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue 
drug use.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (h). Applicant admitted using cocaine, and the manner 
in which she used it necessarily encompassed possessing it, thus raising AG ¶¶ 25(a) 
and (c).  
Applicant disclosed her prior drug use on her e-QIP in April 2008, and she 
declared she had learned her lesson about the implications of drug abuse. She was 
interviewed in May 2008 and unequivocally stated that she did not intend to use illegal 
drugs again, but she used cocaine a month later. Cocaine use is socially acceptable in 
her circle of friends. Although she knows the “correct” answer that she must give to 
obtain a clearance, her declarations of intent to refrain from future drug abuse are not 
convincing. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 25(h) is raised. 
The government has produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c) and (h), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). The first clause of ¶ 
26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent.  
There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 
02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of 
 
7 
 
 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
Applicant’s last admitted drug use was in June 2008, about eight months before 
the hearing, and about one month after she told a security investigator she would never 
use it again. Her frequency of use has been once or twice a year. In the context of a 
five-year record of occasional but regular cocaine use and repeated broken promises to 
abstain, abstinence for eight months is not “a significant period of time.” Thus, I 
conclude her cocaine use was “recent,” not “infrequent,” and did not happen under 
unusual circumstances. Her repeated cocaine use after she submitted a security 
clearance application and after she asserted to an investigator that she would never use 
it again casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude 
AG ¶ 26(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns arising from drug involvement also may be mitigated by 
evidence of Aa demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.@ AG 
¶ 26(b)(1)-(4). The record reflects none of these indicia of intent to abstain from drugs. I 
conclude AG ¶ 26(b) is not established. No other enumerated mitigating conditions are 
applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified her e-QIP by failing to disclose her arrest for 
a felony breaking and entering and unlawful possession of marijuana (SOR ¶ 2.a), and 
gave misleading answers to DOHA interrogatories by stating she was arrested only for 
trespassing (SOR ¶ 2.b). The SOR also cross-alleges Applicant’s drug use as personal 
conduct under this guideline (SOR ¶ 2.c).  
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition pertaining to Applicant’s omissions from her 
e-QIP is set out in AG ¶ 16(a), which applies to:  
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
8 
 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
The relevant disqualifying condition pertaining to Applicant’s omissions from her 
responses to DOHA interrogatories applies to “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(b). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant demonstrated her lack of appreciation for the importance of candor 
when she executed her SF 85 in September 2007, but she was candid about her 
cocaine use when she executed her e-QIP in April 2008. Two issues must be resolved 
to determine if Applicant falsified her e-QIP and her response to DOHA interrogatories 
with respect to her arrest in 1983: (1) Did she know she was charged with a felony 
breaking and entering and possession of marijuana at the time she was arrested in 
1983? and (2) Did she remember being charged with a felony breaking and entering 
and possession of marijuana at the time she executed the e-QIP in April 2008? 
 
 The arrest was almost 30 years ago, when Applicant was only eighteen years 
old. She found it a frightening experience. She vividly remembered spending two nights 
in jail, but her memory was vague about the formal charges or court proceedings. 
Except for her testimony at the hearing, there is no evidence showing the basis for the 
charges. She was accompanied by her mother in court, but she did not have a lawyer. 
She could not remember an arraignment, but she was certain that she would have 
spoken up if she heard that she was charged with intending to commit murder. Although 
Department Counsel made several references to a plea bargain in his questions, there 
is no evidence of a plea bargain. Her testimony regarding the allegations of falsification 
was plausible and credible. I am satisfied that she did not intentionally conceal 
information when she submitted her e-QIP and responded to DOHA interrogatories. 
Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) are not raised. 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions based on Applicant’s use of cocaine are AG 
¶¶ 16(c), (e), and (g). AG ¶ 16(c) applies to 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
 
9 
 
 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies to “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or 
community standing.” Finally, AG ¶ 16(g) applies to “association with persons involved 
in criminal activity.” 
 
 Applicant’s history of cocaine use raises questions about her judgment and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. It has made her vulnerable to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. It would likely have an adverse effect on her 
professional and community standing. She continues to associate with users of illegal 
drugs. I conclude AG ¶¶ 16(d), (e), and (g) are raised. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
repeated uses of cocaine were not “minor” offenses, were recent, did not occur under 
unusual circumstances, and cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. For these reasons and the reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 
26(a) under Guideline H, I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant acknowledged her behavior, but she has not 
obtained counseling or made any changes in her life to alleviate the causes of her illegal 
cocaine use. Thus, AG ¶ 17(d) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). 
Applicant’s teenaged sons are unaware of her cocaine use, making her vulnerable to 
threats of exposure to her sons. Thus, AG ¶ 17(e) is not established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “association with persons involved 
in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt 
upon the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with 
rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 17(g). Applicant continues to associate with her cocaine-
using friends under the same circumstances that existed when she used cocaine in the 
past. Thus, AG ¶ 17(g) is not established. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, intelligent adult. She has repeatedly promised to stop 
using cocaine, but those promises ring hollow in light of her continued use after 
promising to stop. She has made no significant lifestyle changes to reinforce abstinence 
from illegal drugs. She has not demonstrated that she will resist the situational pressure 
caused by continued association with cocaine users. There is a significant likelihood of 
recurrence. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has refuted the allegations of falsifying her e-QIP and her responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, but she has not mitigated the security concerns based on her drug 
involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
