 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No.  08-03664 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On September 27, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions (SF 86). On November 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On January 2, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 29, 2009, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on February 2, 2009. Applicant received 
the FORM on February 9, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. On March 2, 2009, Applicant submitted a letter indicating 
that he had no objections to the FORM and had no additional information. On March 16, 
2009, DOHA assigned the case to me.  
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.w.  
  
 Applicant is 43 years old and divorced. He has two children and two-step 
children.  From 2000 until June 2007, he worked for several different companies until he 
obtained a job, as a laborer, with a federal contractor. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 In June and July 2008 (before the issuance of the SOR), Applicant completed 
sets of Interrogatories related to his finances. He started having financial difficulties 
approximately three years prior to completing the Interrogatories because he had low 
paying jobs without health care benefits, purchased too many items on credit and failed 
to live within his financial means. According to the budget he submitted in July 2008, his 
net monthly income was $1,400 and his expenses were about $2,453, indicating a 
$1,000 monthly deficit. In both sets of Interrogatories, he asserted that he intended to 
seek financial assistance to help manage his debts and finances. (Items 6, 7) With his 
new position and income, he thinks he should be able to address them. (Item 6) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated September 28, 2007, and March 25, 
2008, the SOR alleged 23 delinquent debts, totaling $41,214. All of the debts remain 
unpaid or unresolved. They consist of debts owed to credit card companies, department 
stores and a utility company. Several debts are for medical services, which he 
seemingly incurred while he was without insurance, and one is for unpaid child support, 
which he asserted is paid. (Item 7)  
     
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
4 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19, two of them are potentially disqualifying: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on two CBRs and his admissions, Applicant has been unable or unwilling 
to satisfy debts that began accruing since 2005. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
two disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. The guideline 
includes six examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.   
 
Applicant’s numerous financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2005, 
and do not appear to have arisen out of unusual circumstance. Hence, AG ¶ 2 (a) 
 
5 
 
 
cannot apply. Applicant attributed some of the financial difficulties to periods of low 
paying positions and a lack of medical insurance. However, there is no evidence in the 
record indicating that he responsibly managed his finances during those difficult 
periods, which is necessary for full application of this mitigating condition. Thus, AG & 
20(b) has limited application. Applicant did not present any evidence that he received 
credit counseling or that the 23 delinquent debts are resolved or under control, as 
required under AG & 20(c). Applicant has not paid or initiated repayment of any debt; 
hence, AG & 20(d) does not apply.1 There is no evidence indicating that he disputed 
any of the debts, which is required under AG & 20(e). The record does not support the 
application of AG & 20(f).  
  
 Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 43-years old and has 
worked for a federal contractor since June 2007. In July 2008, he learned of the 
Government’s concerns about his finances and indicated that he would begin resolving 
them. In November 2008, he again received notice of those concerns through the SOR, 
but did not take steps or submit any information indicating that he was attempting to 
resolve the debts and establish a workable budget. Without such proof, there is 
insufficient information in the record to mitigate the financial concerns. His failure to 
address the issues over the past couple years, raises questions about his judgment.  
 
  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial issues.  
                                                          
1 Applicant indicated that his child support payments are current, but did not provide any evidence 
to support his statement. 
 
6 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.w:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                              
   
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
