 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08380 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his criminal and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On November 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 11, 2008, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on March 9, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
 
2 
 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional information. Applicant 
submitted four documents which were marked AE H through K, and admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memo is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 17, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Discovery and Notice 
 
Applicant stated that he never received a copy of Department Counsel’s 
discovery package, which included copies of the Government’s exhibits. He also stated 
that he did not receive a copy of the notice of hearing. I advised Applicant of his right 
under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before the hearing. I also advised 
Applicant that because he did not receive copies of the Government’s exhibits until the 
morning of the hearing that I would postpone the case for at least several weeks. 
Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice or a continuance, and 
requested to hold the hearing on March 9, 2009.   
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the dates in all the 
allegations from “December 4, 2007” to “December 7, 2004.” Applicant did not object to 
the amendment and it was granted. Applicant was asked if he desired additional time to 
address the allegations as amended. He affirmatively waived his right to additional time 
and stated that he wanted the hearing to proceed that day.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended college 
for a number of years but has not yet earned a degree. He is divorced, with no 
children.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested on December 7, 2004, and charged with controlled 
dangerous substance (CDS), manufacture and distribute; destructive device, 
manufacture, possession, and distribution; narcotics production/equipment; CDS 
possession not marijuana; firearm/drug trafficking; possession explosive/incendiary with 
intent; explosive possession without license; and four counts of destructive device, 
manufacture/possess/distribute. He pled guilty to CDS, manufacture and distribute; and 
destructive device, manufacture, possession, and distribution. The remaining charges 
were Nolle Prosequi (dismissed). For the first charge, he was sentenced to 20 years 
confinement, with all but 29 days suspended, given credit for 29 days time served, and 
placed on probation for five years. He was sentenced to 20 years confinement on the 
second charge with all the confinement suspended. He is not required to report to a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 48-49, 73, 92-93; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
probation officer. His probation is scheduled to run through July 2010. Once Applicant 
has completed his probation, the state has agreed to not oppose the court striking the 
guilty findings and imposing Probation Before Judgment for the charges, which would 
negate the conviction. He could then move to expunge his record.2 
 
 Applicant stated that he did not feel that he was guilty of any offense, but he 
accepted the plea bargain because his attorney told him that it would cost about 
$40,000 to fight the case, and he did not have the money. He explains the 
circumstances leading to his arrest and conviction as follows. Applicant has been 
fascinated with science since he was a child. His hero was the noted scientist and 
inventor, Nikola Tesla, who accomplished most of his work in his home laboratory. 
Applicant studied physics, chemistry, and electrical engineering in college and obtained 
his dream job of working in a research laboratory. He held a security clearance without 
incident during his employment at the laboratory. After about ten years of working in the 
laboratory, he became very ill and lost the job in about 2000. He was out of work for 
several years. He started conducting experiments at a makeshift laboratory he built in 
his townhouse and yard.3   
 
 Applicant became interested in how easy it was to make illegal drugs, specifically 
methamphetamine, from over-the-counter cold medications. He began to experiment 
with the cold medications. His stated purpose was to alter the chemical composition of 
the active ingredient so that it could not be synthesized into methamphetamine. He 
stated he had a couple packages of the cold medication when he was arrested. 
Applicant was asked if he had actually manufactured any methamphetamine in his lab. 
He stated he was not certain because he attempted to chemically change the substance 
so that what was produced was not methamphetamine, but his experiment may have 
been unsuccessful and methamphetamine could have been produced.4 
 
 Applicant denied that he was attempting to make explosives, but he admitted that 
many chemicals can be combined to create an explosion. He stated that he was careful 
to keep any chemicals that could have an explosive reaction separated. He admitted 
that he was interested in amateur rockets, known as “candy rockets.” The fuel for the 
rockets is sugar and “saltpeter.” He stated that he was working on a transponder for the 
rockets so that the rockets could be located after they came down. He also had about 
1,000 empty blasting caps. He was attempting to create an electromagnetic field (EMF) 
resistant blasting cap.5  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 55-56, 80-89; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE E, H. 
 
3 Tr. at 49-51, 74-76, 81-82, 93-95; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 51-53, 59-60. 
 
5 Tr. at 53-62, 80-81; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant stated that he will never again conduct laboratory experiments outside 
the confines of an approved lab. Any outside research will be conducted purely 
theoretically.6 
 
 Applicant’s employer is not aware of his criminal record. He stated that the 
company did not ask about his criminal record. He stated that if the company ever asks, 
he will tell them about his record. He listed his criminal record on his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) signed on April 11, 2008.7  
 
 Applicant is highly regarded by friends, co-workers, and supervisors. He is 
regarded as an exceptional scientist and engineer, who is a hard worker, dependable, 
reliable, trustworthy, and honest. His performance appraisals have been excellent. He 
has received numerous awards and has been recognized by his company as employee 
of the year. He has published several scientific publications. He is active in his church 
and is a frequent volunteer.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 65, 68, 70, 94. 
 
7 Tr. at 66-68; GE 1. 
 
8 AE A-D, F, G, I-K. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
Applicant was arrested in December 2004, and charged with numerous felony 
offenses. Through a plea bargain, he pled guilty to, and was convicted of, controlled 
dangerous substance, manufacture and distribute; and destructive device, manufacture, 
possession, and distribution. He was sentenced to 20 years confinement, with all but his 
 
6 
 
time served suspended. He was placed on probation for five years, which is scheduled 
to run through July 2010. The evidence is sufficient to raise all of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a) through (d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct occurred more than four years ago. He pled guilty to 
two serious offenses. All of his 20-year-sentence, except for the 29 days he served 
before the trial, has been suspended. His probation runs through July 2010. With his 
long confinement sentence suspended, Applicant faces the potential of lengthy prison 
time for any probation violation. This is Applicant’s only criminal record. I find that his 
criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a) is partially applicable. I am unable to 
find full mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a) because Applicant remains on probation. I also find 
there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, higher education, good employment record, and 
constructive community involvement. AG ¶ 32(d) is applicable.  
 
 Applicant denied that he intentionally violated the law. He stated that he pled 
guilty because he could not afford the estimated $40,000 that it would cost to plead not 
guilty and fully contest the charges. The doctrine of collateral estoppel prevents me from 
finding that he did not commit the offenses.9 Furthermore, Applicant has admitted that 
                                                          
9 The Appeal Board has addressed the doctrine of collateral estoppel:  
It is well-settled that, with narrow exceptions not applicable in this case, an applicant is 
collaterally estopped from contending that he or she did not engage in the criminal acts 
for which he or she was convicted. Collateral estoppel applies to a criminal conviction 
whether the conviction is based on a verdict after trial or based on a guilty plea. Due 
process of law does not give an applicant the right to relitigate matters that have been 
adjudicated in a prior due process proceeding. Federal and state criminal proceedings 
are entitled to be given full recognition and respect under the doctrine of collateral 
estoppel because they are conducted under procedural and evidentiary requirements that 
exceed those applicable to industrial security clearance cases, and must satisfy Federal 
 
7 
 
he may have actually manufactured methamphetamine. He admitted that he had 
chemicals that when combined would be explosive and he admitted he had about 1,000 
empty blasting caps. He did not submit sufficient evidence for a finding that he is 
innocent of the criminal offenses, even without the constraints of the collateral estoppel 
doctrine. AG ¶ 32(c) is not applicable to the offenses to which Applicant was convicted. 
It is applicable to the charges that were dismissed. He was not pressured or coerced 
into committing the criminal acts. AG ¶ 32(b) is not applicable.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s personal conduct was also alleged under the Criminal Conduct 
guideline, as addressed above. His employer is not aware of his criminal record. He is 
on probation until July 2010, and he has a suspended 20-year-sentence hanging over 
his head. His criminal conduct has made him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
and state constitutional requirements of due process that pay special attention to the 
rights of criminal defendants. Furthermore, DOHA Administrative Judges and this Board 
lack the jurisdiction and authority to pass judgment on the proceedings and decisions in 
criminal cases conducted by Federal and state courts. 
In this case, Applicant entered a guilty plea to a felony drug charge as part of a plea 
agreement. Applicant's guilty plea constituted an admission that he committed the acts 
covered by the criminal charge to which he pleaded guilty. Applicant's motivation for 
entering the guilty plea is irrelevant to its legal effect. Having gained the benefits of a plea 
bargain, it is inequitable for Applicant to seek to retain the benefits of that plea bargain 
and then turn around and seek to repudiate his guilty plea and its legal effect in these 
proceedings.  
(internal citations and footnotes omitted) ISCR Case No. 99-0116 at 2 (App. Bd. May 1, 2000). 
 
8 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Personal Conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The discussion under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is equally appropriate 
for this guideline. AG ¶ 17(c) is partially applicable under the same rationale that I found 
AG ¶ 32(a) to be partially applicable. His criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 
17(d) is applicable. Applicant has fully revealed his criminal conduct to the Department 
of Defense. He has taken some steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. However, he is on probation under the threat of a suspended 
20-year-sentence, and his company is completely unaware of his criminal record. He 
remains vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is partially 
applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 43 years old. He is a 
highly regarded scientist and engineer. Clearly science is his life. When he was out of 
work for an extended period, he started experimenting in his townhouse. He chemically 
altered over-the-counter cold medications that are used to manufacture 
methamphetamine. He stated his intent was not to manufacture methamphetamine, but 
to change the chemical composition of the ingredient in the medication so that 
methamphetamine could not be produced from the medication. He admitted that he may 
have actually manufactured methamphetamine in the process. He also admitted that he 
had about 1,000 empty blasting caps and chemicals that when combined could be 
explosive. He pled guilty to controlled dangerous substance, manufacture and 
distribute; and destructive device, manufacture, possession, and distribution. Applicant’s 
actions were either that of a man who is very bright, but extremely naïve; or someone 
who was attempting something much more nefarious. In either event, his actions 
constituted serious criminal violations.  
 
 Applicant is on probation until July 2010, under the threat of a suspended 20-
year-sentence. His company is completely unaware of his criminal record. While I find 
that Applicant’s criminal behavior is unlikely to recur, he is vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress.  In sum, I conclude that security concerns are still present 
despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
