 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04055 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on November 2, 2007. On November 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, 
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 4, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
15, 2009. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2009. On February 6, 2009, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for February 24, 2009. The 
hearing was held, as scheduled. The Government offered six exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 9 without objection. The Applicant testified, 
and offered five exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – E without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. The transcript was received on March 3, 2009. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, but 
admits all of the other SOR allegations.   
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She has worked for her current employer for five years. 
During that five-year period she has been promoted twice. She is a high school 
graduate with some college credit. She has held a security clearance for 18 years. She 
is married but in the process of a divorce. She has two adult daughters, ages 23 and 27. 
(Tr at 6-7, 25-26, 50; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol when she was 15. She began to drink heavily 
in 1998 after her first marriage ended in divorce. She would drink approximately 4-6 
drinks on weekends. Her heaviest period of drinking occurred in 2004. She would drink 
until she blacked out at times. Her father unexpectedly passed away in 2004. Her 
second husband, a truck driver, was on the road for months at a time. Her children were 
grown and Applicant was left alone. (Tr at 43-44, 50-51) 
 
On November 17, 2004, Applicant was drinking at a bar with some friends. She 
drank approximately four to five beers over a four hour period. She left the bar and 
started to drive home. A police officer pulled her over after observing her cross the 
center line. Applicant refused to take a breathalyzer test. She failed a field sobriety test. 
She was arrested for Driving While Under the Influence (DUI). On February 25, 2005, 
Applicant pled and was found guilty. She was ordered to pay a fine, serve one year 
probation, attend DUI Level I course, and complete 25 hours of community service.  Her 
license was revoked for six months. She took the DUI course on her own volition based 
on the advice of her attorney prior to appearing in court. (Tr at 27-30; Gov 2; Gov 3; Gov 
4; Gov 8) 
 
Applicant attended alcohol classes at the Harbor City Counseling Center. She 
attended 12 group sessions and six Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. Her license was 
restricted. No one told Applicant that she should not drink alcohol during these 
counseling sessions. (Tr at 31, 45; Gov 2 at 4)   
 
On June 27, 2007, Applicant was driving home after going to dinner with some 
friends. She drank approximately four to five beers over a three hour period. A police 
officer observed her crossing the center line and she was pulled over. She refused a 
breathalyzer test. She failed a field sobriety test. She was charged with DUI – second 
offense.  On January 31, 2008, a jury found Applicant guilty of DUI – second offense. 
She was ordered to serve 30 days in jail, 11 month supervised probation, ordered to 
pay $990 in fines and court costs. She was ordered to complete DUI School Level 2 and 
 
3 
 
 
undergo an alcohol and substance abuse evaluation. Her driver’s license was revoked 
for five years. An ignition interlock device was placed on her vehicle for one year. (Tr at 
33-37; Gov 2 at 3, 7-19; Gov 5; Gov 6; Gov 7; Gov 8) 
 
Applicant’s second DUI offense was a wake-up call for her. She realized that she 
had a lot of issues that she needed to confront. She immediately sought help though her 
company’s Employee Assistance Program. On September 4, 2007, she voluntarily 
entered in-patient treatment at an alcohol treatment center. She was discharged on 
September 6, 2007. This was the detoxification stage of the program. The treatment 
records indicate that Applicant was drinking a 12-pack of beer a day until she blacked 
out. Applicant disputes this amount. She was diagnosed by a physician as being alcohol 
dependent. She also was diagnosed with depressive disorder not otherwise specified. 
When Applicant completed detox, there were no beds available in the rehabilitation 
center. Applicant entered the alcohol rehabilitation program in October 2007 when a 
bed was available.  (Tr at 38-40, 55-57; Gov 9; Answer to SOR) 
 
On October 28, 2007, she entered the in-patient alcohol rehabilitation program. 
Upon successful completion of the program, Applicant continued to see an out-patient 
therapist for awhile. She attends AA meetings once or twice a month.  She completed a 
court-ordered Level II alcohol counseling program on November 24, 2008. She 
successfully completed the terms of probation for her second DUI offense on December 
30, 2008. (Tr at 37, 40-41, 48, 57-59; Gov 2; AE A; AE D; Answer to SOR) 
 
Applicant acknowledges that she cannot drink alcohol again. She has no 
intention of drinking alcohol again. She feels great about her sobriety. She admits to 
relapsing in June 2008. On that day, she was informed by a friend that her husband was 
having an affair. She was very upset and drank a six-pack of beer. Applicant’s brother is 
a recovering alcoholic and provides a lot of support. Her mother and her daughters also 
support her. She told them of her relapse and they have been very supportive. She is in 
the process of divorcing her husband. She is working the 12 steps. She is on step 4 
which is cleaning out your inventory. (Tr at 46-50, 52-53, 60)  
 
 The proposal and process manager at Applicant’s company wrote a letter on her 
behalf. He supervised her for several months in 2004 and 2005.  He states that 
Applicant is one of the most consistent, reliable, dependable and honest people he 
knows. She is dedicated to her responsibilities and can always be counted on to do the 
right thing. He is aware of her recent personal difficulties but states that she has made 
great strides over the past year and a half to overcome these difficulties. She is a 
trustworthy individual with a high degree of personal integrity and loyalty. (AE B) 
 
Applicant’s current supervisor wrote a letter on her behalf. She has worked with 
Applicant for 11 years. She states Applicant is a huge asset. She demonstrates a sense 
of optimism, ownership, and commitment to the job. She is aware of Applicant’s 
personal issues but states that Applicant’s personal issues never impacted work. She 
earned the respect of her co-workers and is an extremely professional and hard working 
individual. Applicant has kept her informed of her personal situation. She sought help 
 
4 
 
 
through the Employee Assistance Program and counseling. She has taken a negative 
situation and used it to make her a better person. She recommends her for a security 
clearance. (AE C) 
 
Applicant’s most recent performance report was favorable. Her immediate 
supervisor noted in the comments “ [Applicant] has done a terrific job of transitioning 
into the new organization….She is looked to as a leader in the group and is regularly 
called upon to assume the lead role, in my absence. She is always willing and very 
capable of the responsibilities of this role. [She] provides consistent, timely, and 
accurate support to upper management…..” (AE E)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Condition (AC DC) ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) applies 
because of Applicant’s November 15, 2004, and June 27, 2007, arrests for Driving 
While Under the Influence. 
 
AC DC &22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the person is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent) applies. Applicant admits to drinking heavily on the weekends. Her 
heaviest drinking occurred in 2004. She admits to drinking until she blacked out on 
several occasions. On occasion, her alcohol use was excessive and impaired her 
judgment.   
 
AC DC &22(d) (diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence) 
applies. A physician at the treatment center where Applicant attended in-patient 
treatment in October 2007 diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent with a depressive 
disorder, not otherwise specified.  
 
AC DC &22(f) (relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence 
and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program) applies. Applicant completed 
 
6 
 
 
outpatient alcohol treatment on November 2007. She remained sober for approximately 
seven months. In June 2008, she relapsed as a result of the shocking news that her 
husband was having an affair. It is acknowledged that this was a one-time incident and 
Applicant has not drank alcohol since that date.     
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) ¶ 23(a) (so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. While serious concerns 
are raised pertaining to Applicant’s relapse in June 2008, after being advised not to 
drink alcohol during her inpatient treatment in the fall 2007, her relapse is 
understandable. She reacted to some unfortunate news that she was not expecting. 
She drank a six-pack of beer after she learned her husband was having an affair. She 
told her daughters and her brother that she relapsed. They support her in her efforts to 
remain sober. She has not drank since the June 2008 relapse and has no intention of 
drinking in the future. She attends AA and is working on the 12-step program. The 
recommendations from her supervisors indicates that she is reliable, trustworthy and 
demonstrates good judgment.  
 
 AC MC & 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser) applies.  Applicant acknowledges that she is an alcoholic.  She admits 
that she did not deal with the issue seriously until after her second DUI. She 
successfully completed in-patient treatment, she attends AA, and is alcohol free. Her 
one-time relapse is understandable. She acknowledged what she had done by telling 
her daughters and brother and continues to deal with her alcohol problem by attending 
AA meetings. She has not drank alcohol since June 2008 and does not intend to drink 
alcohol again.  
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under alcohol consumption. 
Guideline G is found for Applicant.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply. Applicant was 
arrested and convicted for Driving Under the Influence on two occasions. Driving Under 
the Influence is a serious criminal offense.   
 
The Government produced substantial evidence by way of exhibits and testimony 
to raise CC DC ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15). An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
September 22, 2005.)   
   
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. 
More than a year and half has passed since Applicant’s second DUI offense. She has 
had no subsequent arrests. She successfully completed the terms of her probation on 
December 30, 2008.  Although she has struggled to remain sober, she has been 
proactive in her efforts to maintain sobriety. She has learned a difficult lesson as a result 
of her past drinking and driving. It is unlikely that she will repeat similar behavior again. 
Her past conduct, while serious, no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness or good judgment.  
 
CC MC ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) applies. Applicant successfully completed probation in 
December 2008. She has had no subsequent arrests. She expressed much remorse 
about her past two arrests. She successfully completed several counseling programs 
and attends AA meetings. She has an excellent employment record. Applicant has  
mitigated the criminal conduct concern. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
 
8 
 
 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past 
struggles with alcohol. I considered that she successfully completed several counseling 
programs, including a 28-day treatment program in October 2007. I considered that her 
alcohol use never affected her job performance. I considered that Applicant was sober 
from the fall 2007 to June 2008. She suffered a one-day relapse as a result of some 
shocking news that she received. Since the relapse, she has remained sober. She has 
the support of her mother, daughters and brother in fight to remain sober. She 
successfully completed the terms of her probation. She does not intend to drink alcohol 
in the future. I also considered the favorable comments of Applicant’s superiors and her 
recent performance report. While Applicant relapsed on one occasion, there is 
substantial evidence to conclude that her alcohol problem is currently under control. 
She is aware that future alcohol use could jeopardize her ability to maintain a security 
clearance. Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, are 
found for Applicant.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
