KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not made a claim of harmful error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-03026.a1
DATE: 03/30/2009
DATE: March 30, 2009
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-03026
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 5, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
2
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested that the case be decided based on the written record.  On January 27, 2009, after
considering the record, Administrative Judge Joseph Testan denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no specific assertion of harmful error on the part of the
Judge.  It contains a brief recitation of facts, some of which are a repetition of facts in the record
below, and some of which are new representations.  Also, the brief is accompanied by several
documents that were not part of the record below. 
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party
has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  Applicant has not made
an allegation of harmful error.  The Board does not review cases de novo.  Also, the Board cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive, ¶ E3.1.29.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED. 
  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
