                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-04186 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
On October 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, 
as amended (Regulation); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 7, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 30, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 4, 2009, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on February 23, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 2, which were received without objections. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
1 
2 
                                                          
and did not offer any exhibits. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted a document, which was marked as 
AE A and was admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memo is marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 2, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old credentialing specialist. He was born in Barbados and 
completed his high school education and some college there. He visited the U.S. on 
different occasions and married a woman in the U.S. in 1990. He moved to the U.S. 
permanently in 1993 and was a permanent resident until 2006 when he became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. His daughter was born in the U.S. in 1990. Although she may 
hold dual citizenship with Barbados because of her parent’s status, no affirmative action 
has been taken to have her recognized as such. Applicant voluntarily served in the 
military in Barbados for four years in the rank of private. He no longer has any obligation 
or commitment to the military.1 
 
 Applicant holds a Barbados passport issued to him in 2001, which will expire in 
2011. His mother and some other family members live in Barbados. Some of his family 
members are also U.S. citizens. Applicant kept the passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen so he would be able to show proof of his Barbados citizenship when visiting 
there and so he could access health services with ease, if necessary. Since becoming a 
U.S. citizen he has not been the recipient of health benefits in Barbados. He intends to 
retire in Barbados and may be eligible for certain benefits if he retained his citizenship. 
He has not voted in an election in Barbados. Since becoming a U.S. citizen he has 
visited Barbados one time and used his U.S. passport.2  
 
 Applicant stated he is willing to renounce his Barbados citizenship.3 Subsequent 
to his hearing Applicant surrendered his Barbados passport to a security official at his 
place of employment. A confirmation letter was received and stated:  
 
[Contractor] will secure [Applicant’s] passport in (sic) until either 
[Applicant] request[s] his passport be returned to him or he leaves the 
company. [Contractor] will notify the DOHA with all requests [for] 
[Applicant’s] passport while employed with [Contractor].4 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
1 Tr. 18-32. 
 
2 Tr. 16, 27-44. 
 
3 Tr. 17-18, 32-33, 45. 
 
4 AE A 
3 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
4 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered the following:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country; 
and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
At the time of his hearing Applicant held a Barbados passport and considered 
himself a dual citizen of Barbados and the U.S. He maintained his foreign passport so 
he could access medical care, if necessary, while visiting Barbados. This is a right of its 
citizens. Applicant never had to access this benefit, so I find he did not accept a benefit 
from Barbados. However, under the circumstances, I find his actions of possessing a 
current foreign passport falls within disqualifying conditions (a) and (b).  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and especially 
considered: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
5 
Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based solely on his birth in Barbados. He has 
actively considered himself a dual citizen prior to his hearing. He kept his foreign 
passport after he became a U.S. citizen. I find AG ¶ 11(a) and (c) do not apply. At his 
hearing he expressed his willingness to renounce his Barbados citizenship. He has also 
surrendered his Barbados passport to his security officer. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 11(b) 
and (e) apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Applicant is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. He intends on returning to Barbados one day to retire. He has expressed 
his willingness to renounce his dual citizenship and has surrendered his foreign 
passport. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public 
trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
