 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06822 
                                                            )                                                            
                                                             )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire,  Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the hearing transcript, pleadings, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Applicant executed a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF-85P) on 
September 29, 2000. He executed a security clearance application (SF-86) on 
December 2, 2004, and he executed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation 
Processing (e-QIP) on June 12, 2007. On November 17, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
2 
 
 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 1, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
January 5, 2009. I convened a hearing on February 6, 2009, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified 
on his own behalf. He called no witnesses and offered eight exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. A through H and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on February 17, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG J, Criminal 
Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) and seven allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.g.). In his Answer to the SOR,   
Applicant admitted all Guideline J and Guideline E allegations and provided additional 
information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact. (Answer to 
SOR; Tr. 21, 35; Ex. D.)  
 
 Applicant, who is 58 years old and employed as a senior developer analyst by a 
federal contractor, seeks a security clearance. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree, 
awarded to him in 1978. He also attended graduate school for one year in the 1980s, 
but did not earn an advanced degree.  In his youth, he married and divorced. He 
married a second time in 2001. He and his wife are foster parents for three special 
needs children. His professional specialty is computer science. He reports an annual 
income of over $100,000.  (Ex. G; Ex. H; Ex. 3; Ex. 4; Tr. 18, 51-53, 65, 79.) 
 
  In 1968, when he was 18 years old, Applicant left home to attend college in 
another state. At college he encountered the “hippie” lifestyle and its drug culture. He 
began using illegal drugs, including LSD. He was arrested in 1969 and charged with (1) 
Unlawful Possession of Drugs for Sale, (2) Transportation/Sale/Manufacture of Drugs 
Without Prescription, and (3) Sale of Narcotics. At the time of his arrest, Applicant was 
under the influence of LSD and in possession of about 20 tabs of LSD, which he 
planned to sell to others. He pled guilty to the charges.  (Ex. 4; Ex. 5; Answer to SOR; 
Tr. 76-78.) 
 
 As a result of his LSD use, he was committed to a state hospital for 30 days for 
observation.  During this period, he violated hospital policy by leaving the hospital.  He 
was subsequently committed to a second hospital for about eleven months.  Thereafter, 
he was placed on six years of supervised probation. From June 1970 to June 1972, he 
returned to college and served two years of the supervised probation. (Ex. 4; Answer to 
SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In 1975, Applicant went with a friend to consult with a divorce attorney. Applicant 
concluded the attorney was arrogant and he was angered by the way the divorce 
attorney spoke to his friend. Three weeks later, in what he defined as retaliation, 
Applicant returned to the attorney’s office, broke in, and stole a lamp and some pieces 
of furniture.  Applicant was arrested and charged with two counts of Felony Burglary 
and two counts of Receiving Stolen Property. He pled guilty to the charges and was 
sentenced to six months in jail.  (Ex. 4; Ex. 5; Tr. 79-81.) 
 
 Fourteen years later, in 1989, Applicant was working as a route driver for a soft 
drink company. Some of the truck drivers made and used methamphetamine to stay 
awake while they drove. They gave the methamphetamine to Applicant, who became 
dependent on the drug. He began to use and sell methamphetamine to others.  In 
October 1989, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Possession of Controlled 
Substances With Intent to Distribute and (2) Use of a Firearm in Relation to Drug 
Trafficking. Applicant pled guilty to the charges in federal court and was sentenced to 10 
years in federal prison (five years on each count).  He served about eight years of the 
sentence in federal prisons and was paroled in April 1998. From about April 1998 to 
April of 2002 or 2003, he was on supervised probation. Since his release from prison in 
1998, he has not been arrested or charged with any criminal behavior, and he has not 
used alcohol or illegal drugs. (Ex. 4; Ex. 5; Tr. 59, 82-86. 88.) 
 
 When he was in prison, Applicant met a man who mentored him and helped him 
to acquire training in computer technology.  When he was released from prison, 
Applicant returned to school and studied diligently to acquire new technical skills and 
abilities. In 2002, his employer honored him as Employee of the Year. (Ex. A; Ex. G; Tr. 
15-16.) 
     
 In September 2000, Applicant executed a Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Positions (SF-85P).  Question 11 on the SF-85P directed the respondent to reply as 
follows: 
 
List your employment activities, beginning with the present (#1) and 
working back 7 years. You should list all full-time work, part-time work, 
military service, temporary military duty stations over 90 days, self 
employment, other paid work, and all periods of unemployment.  The 
entire 7-year period must be accounted for without breaks, but you need 
not list employment before your 16th birthday.   
 
 In response to Question 11, Applicant stated that he was employed as a driver 
for a soft-drink company between July 1992 to October 1997, when, in fact, he was 
incarcerated in federal prison during that time.  (Answer to Statement of Reasons; Ex. 1; 
Ex. 4; Tr. 61-62.) 
 
 In December 2004, Applicant executed an SF-86.  Question 21 on the SF-86 
reads as follows:  
 
 
4 
 
 
21. Your Police Record – Felony Offenses. Have you ever been 
charged with or convicted of any felony offense?  (Include those under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice.) For this item, report information 
regardless of whether the record in your case has been “sealed” or 
otherwise stricken from the court record. The single exception to this 
requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled 
Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under 
the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C.3607. 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to Question 21.  He deliberately did not list his felony 
offenses in 1969, 1975, and 1989. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; Ex. 4; Tr. 61-62.)    
 
 When Applicant executed his SF-86 in December 2004, he was asked the 
following question: 
 
22. Your Police Record – Firearms/Explosive Offenses. Have you ever 
been charged with or convicted of a firearms or explosives offense?  For 
this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your case 
has been “sealed” or otherwise stricken from the court record.  The single 
exception to this requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal 
Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement 
order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607. 
 
 In response to Question 22, Applicant answered “no.  He deliberately failed to 
report his 1989 arrest and conviction for Use of a Firearm in relation to Drug Trafficking.  
(Answer to SOR; Ex.2; Ex. 4; Tr. 61-62.) 
 
 Applicant was also asked the following question when he executed his SF-86 in 
December 2004: 
 
24. Your Police Record – Alcohol/Drug Offenses. Have you even been 
charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?  
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been “sealed” or   otherwise stricken from the court record.  The 
single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions under the 
Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607. 
 
 In response to Question 24, Applicant answered “no.”  He deliberately failed to 
disclose his arrests and convictions for drug-related offenses in 1969 and 1989, as 
specified supra. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; Ex. 4; Tr. 61-62.) 
 
 In June 2007, Applicant executed an e-QIP. Section 23 of the e-QIP asks about 
an Applicant’s police record.  Section 23a asks: “Have you ever been charged with or 
convicted of any felony offense? (Include those under the Uniform Code of Military 
 
5 
 
 
Justice.)” Section 23b asks: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of a 
firearms or explosives offense?”  Section 23d asks: “Have you ever been charged with 
or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?”  An individual responding to 
these questions is advised to “report information regardless of whether the record in 
your case has been ‘sealed’ or otherwise stricken from the record.  The single exception 
to this requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled Substances 
Act for which the court issued an expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 
844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.” 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to the questions posed in Sections 23a, 23b, and 23d of 
the e-QIP.  In doing so, he deliberately failed to disclose his arrests and convictions for 
the felony crimes of Unlawful Possession of Drugs for Sale, 
Transportation/Sale/Manufacture of Drugs Without Prescription, Sale of Narcotics, 
Felony  Burglary, Receiving Stolen Property, Possession of Controlled Substances With 
Intent to Distribute, and Use of a Firearm in relation to Drug Trafficking.  Additionally, he 
also deliberately failed to disclose being charged and convicted of a firearms offense 
and his drug offenses in 1969 and 1989, as specified supra.  (Ex. 3; Ex. 4; Ex. 5; Tr. 61-
62.) 
 
 After executing the SF-85P in 2000, the SF-86 in 2004, and the e-QIP in 2007,  
Applicant signed certifications which read as follows: “My statements on this form, and 
any attachments to it, are true, complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and 
belief and are made in good faith.  I understand that a knowing and willful false 
statement on this form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. (See section 
1001 of title 18, United States Code.)” (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Ex. 3) 
 
 Applicant admitted his falsifications. He explained his motivation for his 
intentional falsifications as follows:  
 
I omitted these offenses from three clearance applications. The first I 
thought got by, so much time had passed.  I knew I was wrong.  Okay?  
So I replicated the info from one to another.  I omitted it because I felt the 
government would not approve me, especially without an accomplished 
resume showing reform.  (Tr. 14.) 
 
I made a conscious decision [to omit information about past criminal 
behavior from his security clearance applications] thinking---feeling that I 
would not have the opportunity to get out of the hole I was in unless I 
established some sort of resume. (Tr. 62.) 
 
 Applicant’s current and past supervisors and co-workers regard him with 
admiration and respect. They consider him to be professional, highly productive, a “self 
starter,” responsible, and reliable.  (Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E; Ex. F.) 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Analysis 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
  Applicant admits a criminal history that spans 20 years. In 1969, he was charged 
and convicted of drug-related offenses. In 1975, he was charged and convicted of two 
counts of Felony Burglary and two counts of Receiving Stolen Property. In 1989, he was 
charged and convicted of Possession of Controlled Substances With Intent to Distribute 
and Use of a Firearm in relation to Drug Trafficking, crimes for which he was sentenced 
to federal prison for ten years. He has not been arrested for any criminal behavior since 
his release from prison in 1998.  
 
  In addition to his criminal history, Applicant admits deliberately falsifying three 
security clearance applications by concealing his criminal conduct. Applicant’s criminal 
history and his deliberate falsification of that history on his security clearance 
applications raise concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) and AG ¶ 31(c).1 
 
  Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If 
“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record demonstrates that Applicant’s criminal behavior between 1969 and 
1989 was serious and substantial. He has not been arrested or charged with criminal 
behavior since his release from federal prison in 1998. During his incarceration, he met 
a mentor who helped him develop skills and abilities he could use to earn a living after 
he was released from prison. After his release from prison, he married and began to 
build his life. He and his wife are reaching out as foster parents to special needs 
children.  Applicant’s supervisors and colleagues praise his personal attributes and his 
professional skills. He demonstrates a good employment record and constructive 
involvement in his community. 
 
 
1 AG ¶ 31(a) reads as follows: “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 31(c) reads: 
”allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 
8 
 
 
  However, in 2000, 2004, and 2007, Applicant deliberately falsified three security 
clearance applications by concealing and failing to report his past criminal behavior.  His 
unwillingness or inability to inform the government about his past criminal behavior 
raises concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Additionally, 
his deliberate falsifications suggest a failure in rehabilitation. I conclude that while AG ¶ 
32(a) and AG ¶ 32(d) apply in part to mitigate Applicant’s criminal conduct between 
1969 and 1989, they do not apply to his more recent criminal conduct involving the 
deliberate falsification of his 2000, 2004, and 2007 security clearance applications. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and certified his security clearance applications in 
2000, 2004, and 2007, he deliberately failed to report his past criminal behavior 
involving illegal drug use, possession, and intent to distribute, felony burglary and 
receiving stolen property, and use of a firearm in relation to drug trafficking. In his 
answer to the SOR, he admitted that his failure to disclose this information was 
deliberate falsification of material facts. At his hearing, he stated that he feared the   
government would not grant him a security clearance if it learned of his past criminal 
behavior. He further stated that this fear motivated him to conceal the truth from the 
government. 
  
The allegations in the SOR raise a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which 
reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
  Several Guideline mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the individual cooperated fully and 
completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
 
9 
 
 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 17(d) might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”   
 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on three security clearance 
applications that he executed and certified as true in 2000, 2004, and 2007. Nothing in 
the record suggests that he took prompt good faith action to correct the omissions, 
concealments or falsifications before he was confronted with the facts. To the contrary, 
he deliberately continued to assert the falsifications for seven years. (AG ¶ 17(a).) 
Nothing in the record suggests that his failure to report his criminal behavior was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice specifically 
about the security clearance process from authorized individuals or legal counsel. (AG ¶ 
17(b).) When he executed his security clearance applications, Applicant knew he had a 
20-year record of criminal behavior. As a mature adult, he knew that his criminal 
behavior was not minor, so remote in time, so infrequent, or had occurred under such 
unique circumstances that it would not seriously impact his eligibility for a security 
clearance. (AG 17(c).) Applicant failed to provide documentation that he obtained 
counseling or had taken other positive steps that might alleviate the circumstances that 
caused his unreliable conduct and, as a result, such behavior was unlikely to recur. (AG 
¶ 17(d).) Nothing in the record suggests that Applicant took positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate the vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress that his behavior 
caused. (AG ¶ 17(e).) I conclude, therefore, that none of the applicable personal 
conduct mitigating conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who has 
been recognized by his supervisors and co-workers as sensible, responsible, and 
trustworthy. After his release from prison, he worked diligently to acquire relevant 
occupational skills. He married and became a foster father to special needs children.  
These actions suggested successful rehabilitation. 
 
However, over a period of seven years, from 2000 to 2007, he completed three 
security clearance applications and deliberately failed to report his past criminal 
behavior, thereby creating a situation that could seriously mislead the government about 
his honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. His falsifications were not minor: they went 
to the heart of his capacity for truthfulness, a critical qualification for one who would hold 
a security clearance. Applicant’s failure to be truthful was deliberate. He made no effort 
to correct his falsifications before the government confronted him with his lack of 
candor. His deliberate falsifications are recent. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
criminal conduct and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:             AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.f.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.g.:   Against Applicant 
 
                        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
