DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxxxxxx Xxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 08-06118
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 6 November 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline G.  Applicant answered the SOR 29 November 2008, and requested a1
decision without hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 24 March 2009. The record in
this case closed 12 February 2009, the day Applicant’s response to the government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) was due. Applicant did not respond to the FORM.
 
The July 2004 conviction for furnishing alcohol to a minor has no security significance within the meaning of2
Guideline G as it did not involve Applicant’s consumption of alcohol. The known facts are that Applicant took
a six-pack of beer to a friend’s party and contributed it to the beverage supply at the party. The next day, he
was arrested for furnishing alcohol to a minor. There is no evidence that Applicant knew there were minors
at the party, but his lack of knowledge would not be a defense to the charge. If he had known there would be
minors at the party, there might be some issue of poor judgment, but would rise to a security concern, if at all,
under Guideline E.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 27-year-old software engineer
employed by a defense contractor since October 2005. He has not previously held a
clearance.
Applicant has a recent history of excessive alcohol consumption, punctuated by
two alcohol-related incidents.  He began drinking alcohol in 2000, while he was in2
college and not yet legal drinking age. He described his drinking pattern as 10 beers
one weekend night from 2000 until his second DUI in July 2007. He acknowledges
drinking and driving 3-4 times annually during this period. Indeed, he was arrested for
DUI in February 2002, when he blew a .09 B.A.C. after a traffic stop in a state that
prohibited a minor driver from driving with a B.A.C. over .02 (at the time the state DUI
threshold was .10 B.A.C. for adult drivers). He had been to a party where he drank 4-5
beers over a 4-5 hour period. He thought he was competent to drive, but was stopped
by officers for weaving in his lane.
In July 2007, Applicant was arrested for a second DUI. He drank 9-10 beers over
fewer than five hours, and was stopped by officers who observed him swerving over the
center line with his high-beam lights on. He failed a field sobriety test (FST), blew a .13
B.A.C. at the scene, and registered .154 on a blood screen taken at the police station.
The blood alcohol levels were nearly twice the state limit of .08, and fell into the state’s
high alcohol rate punishment category (.16 B.A.C. being designated highest rate). At his
November 2007 trial, his license was suspended to November 2008, he received six-
months supervised probation, and ordered to undergo an alcohol evaluation. Applicant
claims, without corroboration, that he was not recommended for further counseling or
treatment. He also claims, without corroboration to have consumed no alcohol since
December 2007, and to have not consumed to excess since his July 2007 DUI. The
government documented that Applicant completed his probation requirements and was
released from supervision in May 2008. The record contains no employment or
character references.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶22.(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or4
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; . . . (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
3
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline G
(Alcohol Consumption).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline G,
demonstrating Applicant’s seven-year history of alcohol abuse punctuated by alcohol-
related arrests in February 2002 and July 2007.  Applicant’s alcohol pattern from 20004
to at least July 2007 is fairly described as binge consumption. He also consumed
alcohol and drove on multiple occasions in those seven years, and is fortunate to have
been stopped only twice. In addition, his alcohol abuse continued after college into his
working career.
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. Although he has not had any
recurrence of alcohol-related arrests since July 2007, he had the incentives of
supervised probation until May 2008 and potential restoration of his drivers license in
November 2008. It is too soon to tell if he will resume drinking or drinking to excess.
Further, Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions under Guideline G. His
¶23.(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual5
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
¶23.(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of6
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent)
or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
¶23.(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has7
no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress;
¶23.(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along8
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, . . . and has received a favorable prognosis by
a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
alcohol treatment program.
4
alcohol abuse was recent, frequent, and not under unusual circumstances.  The record5
contains no evidence of changed circumstances or insights that would augur well for
Applicant to maintain his sobriety. On this record, Applicant is unable to establish either
a pattern of abstinence or responsible use given his recent release from probationary
status, and more recent restoration of driving privileges.  While he has not been6
diagnosed as alcohol dependent or an alcohol abuser, neither does he have any
corroboration that he was not found to require a counseling program after the evaluation
ordered as a result of his July 2007 DUI.  Finally, Applicant lacks the kind of program,7
track record, and prognosis that would demonstrate that his alcohol problems are
behind him.  I cannot conclude Applicant is unlikely to abuse alcohol in the future. In8
essence, the government established its security concerns and Applicant failed his
burden of producing positive information, distinct from the absence of negative
information to establish rehabilitation. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline G against
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
