1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05013
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 30, 2009
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on October 23, 2007 (Item 5).  On October 29, 2008, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H concerning the Applicant.  The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by
President Bush on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR and requested a decision without a
hearing.  Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM) to the
Applicant on January 8, 2009.  The Applicant received the FORM on January 16, 2009,
and was given 30 days to submit any additional information.  He elected not to submit
anything further.  The case was assigned to me on March 24, 2009.  Based upon a
2
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 28, single, and has a college degree.  He is employed by a
defense contractor and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The Government alleges under Guideline H that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has used illegal drugs.  The Applicant admitted all of the
allegations in the SOR.  These admissions are hereby deemed findings of fact.
The Applicant used marijuana at least 200 times from approximately December
1998 to January 2008.  (Item 5 at question 24, Item 6 at 2-3.) He stated that the majority
of his use occurred before June 2005.  During the period between June 2005 and
January 2008, he used marijuana approximately five or six times.  (Ibid.)
In his Answer to the SOR, the Applicant states that he will not use marijuana in
the future.  He further states, “This request for security clearance and keeping my
current job were not the driver for this change of personality.  If security clearance is not
granted, my position on drug usage remains the same in that it is not of value.”
However, he sees three associates every other week who continue to use marijuana.
The Applicant was arrested for Possession of Marijuana in May 2003.  He plead
guilty to Possession of Drug Paraphernalia and paid a fine.  The Applicant maintains
that he did not possess marijuana on this occasion, but he admits to having a marijuana
pipe in his possession.  (Item 6 at 4.)
He also admitted to using LSD twice in 2000 and hydrocodone approximately five
times in 2001.  He has not used either drug since that time.  (Ibid.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the Administrative Judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access
to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
3
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
4
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
The Applicant used marijuana on more than 200 occasions over a period of
approximately ten years.  His last use of marijuana was within a year of the record
closing in this case and was three months after he filled out his e-QIP (Item 5).  He
states that he has stopped any use of marijuana, but based on the recency of his use, I
find this statement not to be credible.  I find that both of the above disqualifying
conditions apply. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶
26 and find that none of them apply to the facts in this case concerning his marijuana
use.  I have especially considered whether to apply the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened under
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
5
The Applicant’s use of LSD and hydrocodone in 2000 and 2001 was minor in
nature and has not been repeated.  This usage has no current security significance.
Accordingly, subparagraphs 1.b. and 1.c. are found for the Applicant.
However, the evidence is clear that the Applicant used marijuana on a number of
occasions over a period of years.  He used it after he was arrested in connection with its
use, and after he filled out his Government questionnaire, which put him on notice of the
Government’s concerns.  Not enough time has passed for me to say with any degree of
certainty that he will not use marijuana again.  He has not mitigated the security
significance of this use.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The Applicant is a young man who
used marijuana, an illegal substance, a considerable number of times over many years.
In viewing all the facts of this case, I cannot find that the Applicant has mitigated the
security significance of his prior conduct.  As set forth above, I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  In addition, I cannot find
that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG
¶2(a)(8)), and that the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil (AG ¶2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and/or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude the Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug
involvement.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
