                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )             ISCR Case No. 08-09111  
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
On April 8, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
On November 24, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) (Item 1), that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
the Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on December 9, 2008. He signed his Answer on 
December 17, 2008, and requested a decision without a hearing. On January 13, 2009, 
DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)2 in support of 
the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant was given 30 days from the date he 
received the FORM to file a response. He did not respond. 
 
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR did not provide clear-cut admissions or denials to 
each allegation. He answered each allegation under Guideline F by denying any “failure 
or inability to satisfy debts and meet financial obligations” and providing explanations 
regarding each allegation. I construe Applicant's Answer as follows: he admits with 
explanation allegations 1.a., and 1.b. He denies allegation 1.c. because he considers it 
to be a duplicate of 1.b. Applicant admits 1.d.and 1.e., which he refers to as “State and 
Municipal charges.” Applicant admits with explanation the medical debts at allegations 
1.f., 1.g., 1.h., and 1.i. Under Guideline E, he denied allegations 2.a. and 2.b.  
 
The case was assigned to me on March 24, 2009, for an administrative decision 
based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and has been married for 24 years. He is the father of a 
21-year-old son and a 17-year-old daughter (Item 14). He earned a Bachelor of Science 
degree in 2006 and is currently employed as a senior systems engineer. Applicant was 
unemployed for approximately 9 months between 2002 and 2003 (Item 5). The record is 
silent as to Applicant's annual income or monthly net remainder after meeting expenses 
and debts. During his security interview, he stated that he meets his current obligations, 
other than the debts alleged in the SOR (Item 4). The SOR debts amount to $43,735. 
. 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 1997, which resulted from the 
failure of his delivery business (Item 4). He met his obligations under the Chapter 13 
payment plan and the bankruptcy was discharged in 2000 (Item 9). In 1998, the year 
after he filed for bankruptcy, Applicant started a software-consulting business. This 
business failed in 1999. After filing his 1999 tax return, the IRS informed him that he 
owed $15,256 because he failed to pay workman’s compensation taxes. Applicant 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 14 documents (Items 1 - 14) proffered 
in support of the government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
contacted a financial professional in approximately 2000 (Item 6). This professional3 
submitted a letter confirming that Applicant has been working with him since that time 
regarding his “federal tax payment short-fall [that] occurred in 1998, 1999, and 2000” 
while Applicant was a “self-employed independent contractor.” (Item 4). The EA also 
noted that “Prior to this period you owned a freight expediting company which incurred 
significant losses and you accumulated significant personal debt as a result of these 
business losses.” (Item 4). It is unclear from the record whether this business is the 
same as the one that resulted in the 1997 bankruptcy. 
 
According to the EA, Applicant has overpaid his taxes since the IRS lien was 
filed. His resulting tax refunds have been applied to the debt, but this has not 
substantially decreased Applicant's liability because of the  
 
IRS practice of applying payments you make to your oldest 
balance. This has the effect of causing the outstanding 
balance to increase because the greatest penalty rates for 
underpayments apply to the most current tax periods.” (Item 
4). 
 
Both Applicant and the EA noted that the IRS has transferred his case file to several 
different IRS offices and different case workers, causing delay in resolving the issue 
(Items 4 and 6). The EA stated that he and Applicant had approximately monthly 
contact with the IRS in 2001; thereafter, the pace decreased to about twice per year 
between 2002 and 2008. Efforts have been increased as of December 2008 (Item 4). 
When Applicant met with an agent for his Subject Interview for this investigation, he 
reported that the EA advised him of a 10-year statute of limitations on IRS debts. 
Applicant was “hopeful the debts will be resolved as a result of the statute of limitation 
rule.” (Item 4). 
 
 Applicant claims in his Answer that the $15,000 lien at allegation at 1.b. and the 
$21,000 lien at 1.c. are the same IRS lien for Tax Year 1999, the difference being 
added penalties and interest (Item 4). However, the EA referred to tax liabilities for Tax 
Years 1998, 1999 and 2000 (Item 4). In addition, the IRS Notice of Lien indicates that 
the $21,000 debt results from liabilities for Tax Years 1999 (approximately $19,000) and 
2001 (approximately $2,000) (Item 11). I find that allegation 1.c. is not a duplicate of 
allegation 1.b. 
 
 In July 2008, Applicant learned that he also incurred a state tax lien as a result of 
failing to pay state workman’s compensation taxes. Applicant has not paid this debt 
because the EA advised him to resolve the federal liens before paying the state lien 
(Item 6). The EA’s letter does not refer to the state tax lien (Item 4). 
 
 The four medical debts alleged at 1.f. through 1.i., which amount to $1,081, 
remain unpaid. Applicant reports that he incurred these debts in 2007 for treatment for 
3 Although Applicant referred to this professional as a CPA (certified public accountant), the letter (Item 4) 
identifies him as an “EA,” which is how he will be identified in this decision. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
himself and his daughter (Item 6). However, the credit bureau reports indicate that the 
$129 debt (allegation 1.f.) became delinquent in 2003 (Item 7) and the $237 debt 
(allegation 1.i.) has been past due since 2004 (Item 8). His insurance provider refused 
to pay them because Applicant could not provide proof that he was covered by medical 
insurance for one year prior to the medical events (Items 4 and 6). At the time of his 
July 2008 security interview, he reported that he expected the issue to be resolved 
shortly. However, his response to the SOR in December 2008 shows that the debts 
remain unpaid (Item 4). 
 
 Applicant did not disclose his federal or state tax liens or his delinquent debts 
when he completed his security clearance application in April 2008 (Items 1, 4, and 5). 
In his Answer, he denied being dishonest, stating that he “did not purposely go out of 
my way to falsify any document.” (Item 4) He reported that he had reviewed his credit 
report but did not find that it contained derogatory information; he did not submit a copy 
of the credit report. He characterized his omission as a mistake, noting that, “People 
have painful problems in their lives that cause pain even today when they’re brought 
up….there are painful personal things in people’s lives that they don’t like to re-visit.” 
(Item 4). However, when Applicant met with the security investigator in July 2008, he 
stated that he did not disclose them because he did not think the debts would appear on 
his credit report Item 6). 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant has owed back taxes 
to the IRS since Tax Year 1998, and his medical debts go back to 2003. His nine-year 
history of failing  to meet his financial obligations support application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant::  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay the federal and state tax liens did not occur in the 
distant past, because the debts are still delinquent. He has worked with a financial 
professional for several years, but his debts remain unresolved. Applicant was advised 
the statute of limitations would apply to his debt and hopes the debts will no longer be 
enforceable. His desire to avoid his legitimate obligation to the federal government casts 
doubt on his reliability and AG ¶ 20a cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because several of Applicant’s attempts at starting and 
maintaining various independent businesses in the late 1990s failed, a condition that he 
could not have predicted. Applicant lacked understanding of how workers compensation 
taxes should be paid, and federal and state tax liens resulted. However, to be 
applicable, this mitigating condition requires that the person act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Instead of acting responsibly, Applicant decreased his efforts to resolve 
the IRS tax liens after 2001 (Item 4), ignored the state tax lien completely, and hoped 
the statute of limitations would absolve him of the federal debt. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant worked with a financial professional on his tax liens, implicating AG 
20(c). However, it cannot be applied because Applicant has not brought the problem 
under control, has not paid the IRS or state government, and has not set up a payment 
plan for any debt. In fact, it appears that he is waiting for the statute of limitations to run. 
For the same reasons, mitigation is unavailable under AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant has paid 
none of the debts alleged in the SOR, including the relatively small medical debts. As 
none of the mitigating conditions apply, I find against the Applicant on Guideline F. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) applies (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities). When he completed his security clearance application in April 
2008, Applicant disclosed neither his tax liens nor his past due medical debts (Item 5). 
Applicant denies in his Answer that he deliberately falsified the information he provided 
to the government, maintaining that he made a mistake (Item 4). However, Applicant's 
admission during his subject interview that he knew he was required to list his 
delinquencies for the previous seven years (Item 4), and that he “did not reveal 
information regarding the liens and the delinquent accounts on his SF-86 because he 
did not believe the debts would show on his credit report” leaves little doubt that he had 
the requisite intent to hide this information from the government.  
 
 The potentially applicable mitigators are AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, 
good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being 
confronted with the facts) and AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Neither condition applies. The record 
contains no evidence that Applicant attempted to inform the government of his financial 
delinquencies. In addition, Applicant’s falsification cannot be considered insignificant 
under AG ¶ 17(c). The government relies on information provided by Applicants, and 
deliberate falsification both undermines the security clearance process, and casts 
serious doubts on an Applicant’s trustworthiness. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence Applicant is 46 years old and 
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult.  
 
8 
 
 
 
Applicant accrued significant debt since 1998. In response to the government’s 
concerns, he offered proof that he has worked with a financial professional on resolving 
the federal tax lien. However, over approximately nine years, no resolution has been 
reached. It is significant that during his security investigation interview, Applicant said he 
hoped that the statute of limitations would resolve his federal debt. It is likely therefore, 
that the reason these large debts have not been resolved is due, at least in part, to 
Applicant's hope that they will lapse based on age. Finally, Applicant's deliberate failure 
to disclose his debts on his security clearance application indicates a lack of 
trustworthiness that is incompatible with the high standards required of those who are 
granted access to classified information. A fair and common-sense assessment of the 
available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he 
has not satisfied the doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s 
interests. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these 
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:.    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b: - 1.i.   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a: - 2.b.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
