                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06930 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Todd W. Reid, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 10, 2005, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On September 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 27, 2008. He 
answered the SOR in writing on October 15, 2008, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on September 29, 2008. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 22, 2008.  DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on January 12, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 27, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2009. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 6, 2009. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional matters.  On February 
5, 2009, he submitted Exhibits F to I, without objection. The record closed on February 
10, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 15, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e, and 1.h of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k of the SOR. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is married (in 2003), and 56 years old.  He was in private business until 
September 2004, when his employment was terminated. He now seeks a security 
clearance so that he can work for a defense contractor.  He signed a letter of intent with 
the company in September 2005, being considered a contingent hire, and the company 
is waiting for him to obtain his security clearance. (Tr. 63, 64, 69-73; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has a college degree he obtained in 1975.  He also obtained another 
degree in February 2006, in an attempt to retrain himself after his prior business 
relationship was terminated in September 2004. Applicant was unemployed from 
September 2004 until May 2008.  He and his wife work as title abstractors on a per 
diem payment basis, earning about $75,000 before taxes and deductions annually.  His 
wife owns a home in Toronto, Canada (she is a U.S. citizen), and Applicant owns a 
home in his hometown.  He and his wife pay $535 monthly on the Canadian mortgage, 
and the home in the United States has no mortgage debt on it.  Applicant owns two 
high-mileage automobiles which are fully paid. He has one credit card on which there is 
no balance owed, and two gasoline credit cards which also have no balances on them.  
He pays his monthly debts on time and is current on them.  Since his September 2004 
termination, Applicant has not used credit cards to maintain his lifestyle, nor has he 
incurred any delinquent debt.  He has not purchased a new car, or anything involving a 
substantial amount of money.  He did borrow money to pay for his degree as part of his 
effort to retrain himself.  Those student loans of $40,000 for his latest degree are being 
paid on time at the rate of $164.57 monthly.  (Tr. 38-40, 43, 44, 53-55, 60-62, 68) 
 
 Applicant was the manager of an auto transmission store and the area 
development representative for the franchisor for the same company.  He managed the 
store and held 49% of the stock in the corporation from 1985 to 2004.  His income in 
2004 was about $90,000 from this business.  He had a partner who also owned 49% of 
the stock.  A third partner owned 2%.  In September 2004, Applicant received a letter 
from his partners announcing the date for a stockholder’s meeting, which had not 
occurred previously during the life of the corporation.  At that meeting, Applicant was 
removed as a director and his employment contract was terminated.  Applicant retained 
 
3 
 
 
attorneys in 2005 and sued his former partners for shareholder oppression and wrongful 
termination.  The lawsuit is scheduled to be heard in April 2009 for a decision on the 
merits.  He attempted to negotiate a settlement with his former partners from 2005 to 
the current time, but has been unsuccessful.  (Tr. 21-27, 69-76; Exhibit D) 
 
 The SOR lists 11 delinquent debts, totaling about $87,000.  The delinquent debt 
on the January 2009 credit report is $63,675.  All of the debts listed in the SOR pertain 
to credit card debt incurred before September 2004, except the electric power debts 
(the final two allegations in the SOR, Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k, for $140 and $282, 
respectively), which Applicant asserts he paid in November 2004.  Applicant terminated 
the other credit card accounts in October 2004, and returned the credit cards to the 
issuers.  Before 2004, Applicant had excellent credit and paid his debts in a timely 
manner, as shown on his 2000 and 2003 credit reports. (Tr. 19, 20, 24, 30-37, 52, 66, 
67, 87; Exhibits 2-5, A, B) 
 
 Applicant owes $7,850 on a credit card (Subparagraph 1.a).  It has not been 
repaid. (Tr. 31, 32; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $3,409 to a collector for a store credit card (Subparagraph 1.b).  
It has not been repaid. (Tr. 19, 32; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $17,165 on a bank credit card (Subparagraph 1.c).  It has not 
been repaid. (Tr. 19, 33; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $11,907 on a store credit card (Subparagraph 1.d).  It has not 
been repaid.  Applicant is attempting through his attorney to negotiate a settlement on 
this account at 35-40% of the balance, but the creditor has not responded to the 
attorney’s offer. (Tr. 19, 34, 82; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $2,956 on a store credit card (Subparagraph 1.e).  It has not 
been repaid. (Tr. 19, 35; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $3,675 to a collector (Subparagraph 1.f).  It has not been repaid. 
Applicant has a current offer outstanding to settle this debt at the 35-40% rate of the 
balance, but the creditor has not responded to the offer. (Tr. 82; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $12,717 to a collector (Subparagraph 1.g).  It has not been 
repaid. (Tr. 30, 36; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $12,749 to a collector for a credit card debt (Subparagraph 1.h).  
It has not been repaid. It may be a duplicate billing for the debt set forth in 
Subparagraph 1.g because of the similarity of the amounts.  This debt also has a 
pending settlement offer made to the creditor by Applicant’s attorney, but the creditor 
has not responded to it yet. (Tr. 31, 36, 82; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant owes $9,413 to a collector on behalf of a financial institution 
(Subparagraph 1.i).  It has not been repaid. (Tr. 37; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant’s attorney sent letters to all these creditors on January 19, 2009, 
seeking to negotiate a compromise and settlement of these debts.  He has not received 
replies as of the date of the hearing to these letters with specific proposals to settle 
these debts for amounts less than listed in the SOR.  Applicant expected his lawsuit 
against his former partner would be settled in 2006 or 2007, enabling him to recoup 
funds sufficient to repay these debts.  That settlement of the lawsuit has not occurred.  
The case is now set for trial in April 2009.  (Tr. 21-26, 49, 52; Exhibits C, D, E) 
 
 Applicant has a federal tax debt from 2004 and 2005 of $5,225.18, resulting from 
the closure of his transmission businesses after his ouster from the corporation.  He has 
an installment payment agreement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) through 
which he pays at least $137 monthly.  He owes $4,220 to a state tax agency for the 
same business closures, and pays $188.21 monthly on that installment payment 
agreement. (Tr. 58-60) 
 
 A long-time friend of Applicant testified for him.  He considers Applicant a 
mathematical expert, and very trustworthy.  He would employ him in a sensitive position 
in his company any time. (Tr. 92-108) 
 
 Applicant gave credible and persuasive testimony.  He was well organized in his 
presentation, and was specific in his recollections of past events, and financial 
obligations. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt after he was ousted from his 
corporate position in 2004.  He was financially unable to pay these obligations for the 
 
6 
 
 
past four years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be 
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial 
worries arose after September 2004. He had credit card debt which he incurred in the 
normal course of his business and personal activities.  He paid these debts on time 
each month until he lost his job in September 2004.  Then he did not have any income 
from which to pay these debts. These circumstances are no longer extant because they 
were unique based on his corporate position, loss of that job, and the resultant inability 
to pay the debt when he was unemployed. I find the behavior occurred under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it does not raise concerns about 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence raises this 
potentially mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, 
Applicant’s financial problems arose from his lengthy period of unemployment since 
September 2004 to the present.  He became unemployed when he was ousted from his 
corporate position through no fault of his own, but rather the action of his now former 
partner. He acted responsibly by canceling the credit cards immediately, and not 
accumulating any more debt, except  his student loans used by Applicant to obtain 
retraining. I find this potentially mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this 
case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c).  Since 2005 Applicant has been represented 
by attorneys in attempts to settle the debts and get them paid by proceeds of his lawsuit 
against his former partner. His attorney has the problem under control, and is 
attempting to resolve it with all the creditors.  This mitigating condition applies.  
 
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant 
retained an attorney to represent him on all the delinquent debts, and to resolve them 
either by payment or settlement.  He paid the two energy debts in early 2005.  He has 
nine delinquent debts remaining, and intends to pay these from the proceeds of his 
lawsuit against his former partner for ousting him from the corporation they both owned. 
I conclude this potentially mitigating condition applies. If he does obtain a satisfactory 
judgment in the case, he remains willing to pay the debts in accordance with the 
settlement offers he made when he earns the funds to do so. 
 
7 
 
 
 
The remaining two mitigating conditions have no applicability to this case, and 
are not relevant.  Applicant is not disputing the debts, and there is no affluence resulting 
from a legal source of income. 
 
Finally, the security concern stated in AG ¶ 18 is directed toward the failure or 
inability of an applicant to spend his income responsibly, and pay his debts in a timely 
manner.  These actions, the concern states, show poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
an unwillingness to live by certain rules.  However, Applicant demonstrated he was 
paying his debts before his corporate termination at the shareholder’s meeting in 
September 2004.  Only that action, which surprised him, and his subsequent 
unemployment until May 2008, have prevented him from paying these debts.  His 
record of responsible financial management during his business career shows this 
security concern is not applicable in Applicant’s unique situation. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case to be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant clearly explained in a 
credible and persuasive manner that but for the actions of his partner in 2004, which 
came as a complete surprise to him at the shareholder’s meeting, he would have 
continued to pay the debts listed in the SOR on time, and they would never have been 
an issue. Applicant also demonstrated his efforts since 2004 to resolve these debts 
through legal representation on proposed settlements with the creditors.  His attorney 
also filed a lawsuit against the former partner seeking compensation for the unlawful 
actions.  This lawsuit, if successful, would yield sufficient funds to repay all these debts, 
especially if the creditors agreed to reduce the amounts sought by eliminating interest 
 
8 
 
 
and penalty fees accumulated on the accounts since 2004.  If he is not successful, he is 
committed to repaying his debts from his future income.  These debts are ancillary to 
the main issue of the corporate wrongdoing; they cannot be a source of improper 
pressure or duress because of their public nature. Of course, the issue is not simply 
whether all his debts are paidBit is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. While the debts remain unpaid pending 
the outcome of the lawsuit, they are insufficient under these unique circumstances to 
raise security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  I conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant also. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.k:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 After considering all of the evidence presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  His eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
