                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06522 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
C and F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR allegations under Guideline C in writing on 
September 19, 2008, but failed to respond to any of the allegations under Guideline F. 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
to me on February 10, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 24, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on March 3, 2009 by video-teleconference. 
Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement.1 Applicant was located at 
Luke AFB in Phoenix, Arizona and Department Counsel and I were located at the 
DOHA offices in Arlington, Virginia. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through H. The record remained open until March 10, 2009, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. He did not provide any additional documents and the 
record was closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 13, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted in his answer the allegations under Guideline C in the SOR. 
On the record he admitted all of the allegations under Guideline F. His admissions to 
the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old helicopter pilot who is employed by a federal 
contractor. His employment had a rotational shift of working six weeks on and then six 
weeks off. He has not been able to work pending the outcome of his security clearance 
determination. Applicant was born in Ireland and earned the equivalent of a U.S. high 
school diploma. He also took post-high school courses and served as an apprentice for 
a period of time. He moved to the U.S. in 1987. He attended and completed flight school 
in 1989 and received his private pilot’s license.2  
 
Applicant married his first wife in 1990 and they divorced in 1992. He has a son 
from that marriage with whom he has had no contact. He married a second time in 1993 
and they divorced in 1995. He has a daughter from that marriage for whom he provides 
support. He visits her every two to three months and spends approximately three to four 
weeks with her in the state where she and her mother reside. Applicant provides half of 
the cost of her private school tuition of $14,500 annually and set up a savings account 
for her that has approximately a $17,000 balance. Until he stopped working, he 
contributed a couple hundred dollars a month to the account. He also splits other 
expenses incurred for his daughter with his ex-wife. He estimated his annual income to 
be approximately $76,000.3  
 
Applicant was a permanent resident of the U.S. in 1987 when he applied for U.S. 
citizenship. Due to logistical and administrative problems, his application was delayed. 
He became a U.S. citizen in 2001. Applicant lived and worked in the U.S. in 
1 Tr. 5-6. 
 
2 Tr. 21, 49-51. 
 
3 Tr. 52-58. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
approximately 1990 to 1993. He was employed by an American company and worked 
for them in a foreign country from 1994 through 1997. From 1998 to 2004 he resumed 
employment in the U.S. Many times, his employment was seasonal and he worked only 
six or seven months of the year. During the off-seasons, he would return to Ireland. All 
of his family lives in Ireland except a sister who resides in the U.S. In 2004 he returned 
to Ireland to care for his aging parents. His mother died in December 2004 and his 
father remains in Ireland. In 2005, while residing in Ireland he accepted employment 
with his current employer.4  
 
Applicant retained his Irish passport when he became a U.S. citizen. It expired in 
2005 and he renewed it. It will not expire until 2015. He was aware that having a foreign 
passport was a potential disqualifying condition and was told prior to the hearing that he 
could surrender, destroy, or invalidate his passport to mitigate the condition. Although 
he stated he was willing to do so, he did not. He admitted that on one occasion, in July 
2008, he traveled on his Irish passport because he was not in possession of his U.S. 
passport. Normally, he travels on his U.S. passport. Applicant permanently resides in 
Ireland in his father’s home and travels to the U.S. to visit his daughter. Applicant travels 
with both his U.S. and Irish passport.5  
 
Applicant does not own property in either the U.S. or Ireland. He does not receive 
health benefits in Ireland or any social services. He is not entitled to any type of work or 
old age pension from the Irish government.6 He has not voted in Ireland and is also not 
registered to vote in the U.S. He has a checking account in Ireland with approximately 
700-800 Euros. He maintains the savings account for his daughter in Ireland. Because 
she is a minor he is the custodial account owner. He does not pay taxes in Ireland.7  
 
 Applicant has a federal tax lien filed in July 2003 for tax years 1997, 1998, and 
1999, in the amount of $25,311; a federal tax lien filed in July 2004 for tax years 2000 
and 2001 in the amount of $20,663; and a federal tax lien filed in March 2008 for tax 
years 2002, 2003 and 2005, in the amount of $15,039. Applicant also has a state tax 
lien filed in July 2001 for tax year 1999 in the amount of $2,290.8 As of the filing of the 
SOR, he has not provided proof that he paid any of the total outstanding tax liability of 
$63,303. 
 
 Applicant admitted he did not file his income taxes during certain years from 
1997 to 2007. He stated: “I know I didn’t file certain years, yes, I just put it on the long 
4 Tr. 22-36, 59-60. 
 
5 Tr. 36-41, 62-69. 
 
6Tr. 70-72; AE G and H.  
 
7 Tr. 41-46, 77-78, 123. 
 
8 Tr. 93-94; GE 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
finger, and it was past the date, and I didn’t get an extensions, I just blew it off, yes.”9 
He admitted there were consecutive years that he did not file. He did not work in 2004. 
His testimony was convoluted, confusing and unconvincing. He could not remember 
what years he filed and what years he did not file. He testified that he paid taxes every 
year, but did not have enough withholding taxes taken from his pay. He became aware 
in 2004 that he was not having enough money withheld from his pay He testified that he 
believed he was entitled to a foreign tax exemption because during some of the tax 
years he was out of the country for more than 330 days. However, it appears the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) disallowed this exemption. He learned in 2000 that that 
the IRS would not allow this exemption.10  
 
 After learning in 2004 of the tax liens filed against him, Applicant attempted to 
resolve his tax problems. He had a friend help him. He believed she spent 
approximately two to three years arguing with the IRS and made no progress. He 
admitted he did not follow-up with this person “as tightly as I should have.” In 2004, he 
stated he filed all of his back tax returns but was not given credit for certain years. No 
documentation was provided to substantiate his statements or filings, as he did not keep 
copies of all of his tax returns. Applicant testified that in 2007 he hired an accounting 
firm to address his tax problems.11 Applicant provided a letter from the accountant that 
states the following:  
 
We have been engaged by [Applicant] to handle, along with his attorney, 
matters related to outstanding tax matters for the years 2005-2008. We 
have prepared for [Applicant] Forms 1040 for 2006, 2007 and 2008, and 
an amended 1040X for 2005 to be filed for those years.12 
 
A letter from Applicant’s attorney reflects that he has been retained by Applicant and is 
handling “his tax matters with the Internal Revenue Service.”13 Applicant testified he 
hired his attorney in late 2007. 
 
 Applicant provided documents from his accountant labeled “Tax Return Filing 
Instructions,” for 2008, 2007, 2006 and 2005.14 It appears these are worksheets that 
were prepared for Applicant advising him that for tax years 2005, 2006 and 2007, he 
should mail his tax returns that were prepared for him as soon as possible. The return 
for 2008 advises him to mail the return by April 15, 2009. Based on the accountant’s 
9 Tr. 113. 
 
10 Tr. 47-48, 79-83, 90-101, 112-114; GE 7 notes Applicant’s failure to pay his taxes and also 
accesses a $500 penalty for filing a frivolous tax return.  
 
11 Tr. 46-47, 83-88. 
 
12 AE F. 
 
13 AE E. 
 
14 Tr. 87-88.AE A, B, C, and D.  
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
letter, the tax return filed for 2005 is an amended return. It appears the other returns are 
being filed for the first time. Applicant did not provide copies of his tax returns for which 
the instructional worksheets were prepared. There is no mention by either Applicant’s 
accountant or attorney of the status of the returns for tax years 1997 to 2004. The 
worksheets reflect that Applicant does not owe money, which contradicts the IRS 
documents. Applicant stated that his past tax refunds were garnished by the IRS and 
applied to his tax debt. Although this is likely, I did not receive any documentation to 
substantiate his claim. The only payments made towards his back taxes appear to be 
through an involuntary garnishment from the IRS. He did not put any money aside to 
pay his back tax debts.15  
 
Applicant did not provide copies of any of his tax returns that he filed either on 
time or late. He did not provide any documents from the IRS reflecting the balance on 
his current tax lien debts. He is not proud of his actions and believed he was stupid to 
trust his friend in 2004. At first he could not recall ever working in the state that filed a 
tax lien against him. Later he admitted that he had lived in that state and that it is the 
likely source of the debt. He admitted he thought he could “stick his head in the sand” 
and that he has been slow to resolve his tax problems. No proof was provided to show 
Applicant has resolved his tax problems and is paying his back taxes. The worksheets 
provided show Applicant is entitled to refunds. The supporting documents were not 
provided.16 I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible regarding his actions on his 
taxes. Applicant’s balance of $63,303 owed for back taxes may be reduced due to 
refunds being involuntarily garnished, but he failed to provide a specific accounting of 
the amount. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
15 Tr. 99-109. 
 
16 Tr. 88-90, 99-105, 112-122. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered the following:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
 
7 
 
 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country; (6) 
seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; (7) voting in a 
foreign election; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant retained his Irish passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and used it on 
one occasion. He then renewed his Irish passport and it remains valid and in his 
possession. I find both AG ¶ 10(a)(1) and (b) apply.  
I have considered all six of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and 
especially considered: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor, and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
 
 Applicant remained a dual citizen with Ireland after becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
lives in Ireland and on at least one occasion used his Irish passport for travel. He 
renewed his Irish passport in 2005 and it remains in his possession and valid until 2015. 
Applicant has not destroyed, surrendered or invalidate his Irish passport, and seemingly 
has no intention to do so. He has not expressed a willingness to renounce his Irish 
citizenship. The record was held open to allow Applicant time to provide additional 
evidence. None was provided. I find none of the disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
8 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has federal and state tax liens debts, totaling $63,303 that remain 
unpaid. He has been aware of them for several years. He admitted he failed to file his 
taxes during certain years, but was uncertain which years. Despite becoming aware of 
his problems, he continued to act irresponsibly toward his tax debts by ignoring them. I 
find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered five of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control”);  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant ignored his tax problems for a number of years. He did not file his taxes 
during certain years. He has not kept copies of documents he stated his tax preparer 
completed for him. He only recently filed his 2006 and 2007 tax returns. He did not 
provide any evidence as to what action he has taken on the state tax lien or on the tax 
issues from the earlier tax years. The problem remains unresolved. I find (a) does not 
apply because Applicant’s tax problems remain ongoing and unpaid. Applicant admitted 
his tax problems are due to his failures to address the issues timely, failure to file some 
of his taxes timely, and failure to follow-up with the person who was assisting him. None 
of these circumstances were beyond Applicant’s control, and therefore I find (b) does 
not apply. Applicant hired an accountant and attorney to help address his tax problems. 
However, his accountant only recently prepared tax returns for 2006, 2007 and an 
amended return for 2005. No proof was provided that Applicant has filed the returns. It 
is unclear what the status is for the earlier tax years. Applicant also hired an attorney to 
assist him with his tax problems. I find (c) partially applies because Applicant sought 
assistance from an accountant and attorney. However, questions remain regarding the 
earlier tax years and there is insufficient evidence that his problems are under control.  
 
 Applicant has not made any voluntary payments to the IRS for his overdue taxes. 
Therefore, I do not find (d) applies. Applicant stated that he was not given credit for 
certain things, but did not articulate exactly what his dispute was, nor did he provide 
documentation of his dispute. He may have legitimate disputes with the IRS, but without 
further substantiation, I find (e) does not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He retained his dual citizenship status with Ireland, maintains an Irish passport, 
 
10 
 
 
has renewed it, and used it for travel on at least one occasion. Applicant was aware of 
the foreign preference security concerns for months prior to his hearing and has not 
surrendered his Irish passport. He permanently resides in Ireland. Applicant failed to file 
and pay his taxes for certain tax years. He has federal and state tax liens filed against 
him in the amount of $63,303. Although he has been aware of his tax problems for 
many years he has not been proactive in resolving them until 2007. He had a friend help 
him in 2004 but the problem remained. It is unclear whether all of his tax problems are 
being addressed. Although his accountant completed the tax forms for certain years, the 
current status of his tax liens are unclear. He did not provide sufficient documentation to 
support that he has resolved his financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from foreign 
preference and financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
