 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05259
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On June 13, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86) to renew a security clearance required for her job with a defense
contractor, where she works as a senior data coordinator. After reviewing the results of
Applicant’s background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is1
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified
information. On October 14, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered in3
support of the government’s case.
2
(SOR) alleging facts which have raised security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F (financial considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a
hearing. On December 8, 2008, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant3
received the FORM on January 6, 2009, and was given 30 days to file a response to the
FORM. She timely responded to the FORM and the case was assigned to me on March
3, 2009.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged Applicant owed approximately $25,220 for 13 delinquent
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.m. In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one
of the allegations. She denied SOR ¶ 1.i, asserting the debt was paid through a
settlement offer. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make
the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 28 years old and, since June 2005, has worked for a defense
contractor. She served in the U.S. Air Force from January 2001 until January 2005.
After leaving the Air Force, she was unemployed until she was hired by her current
employer. Applicant first received a security clearance in 2001 and the SF 86 she
submitted in 2007 appears to be for a periodic re-investigation of her suitability for
access to classified information.
Applicant has three children, ages 5, 4, and 3. She and her husband were
married in April 2001. They separated after she left the Air Force, but reconciled around
the time she was hired by her employer. In July 2005, the couple bought a van for their
family, financing $32,671 for the purchase. However, when Applicant’s husband lost his
job because the electrical company where he worked closed, they could not afford the
payments and surrendered the car to the finance company. Applicant still owes
approximately $14,746 for the balance due on the loan after the car was resold.
Applicant had accrued several credit card and other personal credit obligations while
she was in the Air Force; however, after she left the service she was unable to continue
paying those debts.
Applicant used a debt relief agency to whom she paid $275 each month between
November 2006 and June 2007. However, she stopped using the firm when she
realized that, as often happens with such firms, the money was being taken as
administrative costs rather than being used to pay down her debts. As to subsequent
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
efforts to resolve her debts, she asserted in her subject interview, in response to the
SOR, and in response to the FORM that she is (a) planning to settle her debts by
February 2009, (b) will use or has used her income tax refunds to pay down her debts,
(c) after speaking with creditors and reaching settlement agreements with some, she
has set up a savings account into which funds are automatically deposited from her
paycheck to use for repayment, (d) she has or will consult with a financial counselor
who will help her adhere to a budget, and (e) she will get a second job so she can pay
down her debts faster. Applicant has not submitted any documentation to corroborate
these claims.
In response to interrogatories from DOHA adjudicators, Applicant submitted a
personal financial statement that showed she has about $263 remaining each month
after expenses. That figure includes payment on the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors4
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concern and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - financial considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in the
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.m. Further, Applicant admitted to all but one (SOR ¶ 1.i) of the
allegations. As to her denial, the debt is documented in the government’s information
(FORM, Item 8), but it is unclear what information in the file corroborates Applicant’s
assertion she paid the debt. The file contains a receipt for payment of $109.67 (FORM,
Item 6); however, there is no apparent explanation for this payment. Even assuming it is
in satisfaction of SOR ¶ 1.i, the record still shows that Applicant has a history of unpaid
debts dating back to at least 2005. The record also shows she has been unable or
unwilling (or both) to pay her debts. She has been steadily employed for nearly four
years, but has not paid even those debts of less than $120 each (SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.e and
1.m). As to her claims that she has taken action to resolve her debts and improve her
personal finances, she has provided nothing that would corroborate her statements.
Based on the foregoing, I have applied the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting
 See footnote 4, supra.8
 See footnote 7, supra. 9
5
financial obligations). In response, Applicant did not present sufficient information to
support application of any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20. It is understandable
that periods of unemployment, unexpected reductions in income, or marital separation
would cause or exacerbate one’s indebtedness. However, Applicant has been employed
with a positive cash flow for most of the past four years. Yet she has not presented any
information that would establish she has actually done anything to resolve her debts,
which must also be viewed as recent because they are ongoing and unresolved.
Despite having the means to take action to resolve at least some of her more modest
debts, she has failed to act in any meaningful way to improve her financial condition.
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the government’s adverse
information about her finances. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 28 years old and
presumed to be a mature adult. She has served in the military and has held a clearance
since 2001. However, the great weight of the available information shows she has failed
to meet her financial obligations since she was discharged from the Air Force and is
unlikely or unable to do so in the near future. A fair and commonsense assessment  of8
all available information bearing on Applicant’s finances shows she has failed to
address satisfactorily the government’s doubts about her ability or willingness to protect
the government’s interests as her own. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
government.9
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
