 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09366 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application, Standard Form 86, on May 
13, 2008. On December 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
On January 2, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2009. On 
February 6, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for February  
26, 2009. The case was heard on that date. The Government offered three exhibits 
which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 3. Applicant testified and 
offered one exhibit which was admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The record was 
held open until March 12, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. No 
 
2 
 
 
additional documents were submitted. The transcript was received on March 10, 2009.  
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denies the allegation in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. He 
admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.f.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old field engineer employed with a Department of Defense 
contractor seeking a security clearance.  He has worked for his company since May 
2008. From August 1991 to November 2000, he served on active duty with the United 
States Air Force. He separated at the rank of E-5 with an honorable discharge. He held 
a security clearance from 1993 to 2006. He is married. He has two children from his 
second marriage, a daughter age 9, and a son age 8. His wife has four children. Two 
adult sons, a daughter, age 19 and a son, age 8. (Tr at 4-5, 14, 16-17; Gov 1.)  
 
On May 13, 2008, Applicant completed an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP), in order to apply for a security clearance. (Gov 1.) A 
subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had six delinquent 
accounts, an approximate total balance of $43,811.  The delinquent accounts included:  
a $163 medical debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 1); a $11,935 personal 
loan from a credit union that was charged off in September 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 
1; Gov 3 at 8, 10); a $10,477 delinquent credit card account that was charged off in 
September 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 3 at 5); a $4,105 personal loan from a 
credit union that was charged off in October 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 3 at 10); 
a $6,715 spousal support account that was placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 
2; Gov 3 at 4); and a $10,416 personal loan with a bank that was charged off in July 
2006 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 3 at 10). 
 
When he separated from the military, Applicant obtained a well paying job at an 
overseas location. He was able to meet all of his expenses. In November 2004, his wife 
at the time left Applicant and his children after encountering some legal trouble. She 
moved back to the United States. She has not seen the children since. (Tr at 13, 16, 19-
20, 32) 
 
In May 2006, Applicant decided to leave his overseas job and move back to the 
United States. His children were being educated in the foreign country’s educational 
system. He believed his children were not getting a proper education because they 
were not being taught to read and write English. (Tr at 34-36) Applicant met his current 
wife while overseas. Applicant admits that part of his decision to move back to the 
United States was to be near and eventually marry his current wife. Upon moving back 
the United States, Applicant and his children moved in with his current wife. She is an 
active duty E-6 in the United States Navy. His divorce from his second wife was final in 
April 2007.  He married his current wife in June 2007. (Tr at 17, 33 – 34, 39) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began after he moved back to the United States. 
He was unemployed between May 2006 and July 2007. He found employment in July 
2007, but was laid off after six months in February 2008. He was unemployed for three 
months until he was hired in his current position in May 2008. (Tr at 36-38; Gov 1) 
 
In his answer the SOR, Applicant indicates that both of his parents suffered from 
acute life threatening illnesses during the year he returned from the United States. It is 
not clear whether this impacted his financial situation. Applicant did not testify about his 
parents’ illnesses at hearing.  
 
When Applicant’s second wife moved back to the United States, she obtained a 
spousal support agreement in the local jurisdiction where she resides. Applicant was 
ordered to pay $500 a month spousal support until the divorce was final. Applicant owes 
approximately $6,515 in arrearages. He made his first payment on December 5, 2008. 
He intends to send monthly payments until the debt is resolved. The record was held 
open, in part, to allow Applicant submit proof of additional monthly payments. (Tr at 21-
22, 49-50) At the close of the record nothing was submitted.  
 
With respect to the medical debt is SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant denies knowledge of 
this debt. It is a $163 medical debt which he believes his wife’s military health insurance 
should have paid. He tried to locate the medical facility where this debt was incurred but 
has not been able to contact them. (Tr at 23-26) 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b -1.f remain outstanding. In May 2008, he 
entered into an agreement with a company who agreed to resolve and/or settle his 
debts for him. He paid the company a couple thousand dollars up front and $375 
monthly. In February 2009, he terminated the agreement because they took his money 
but were not paying on his delinquent accounts. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to provide a copy of the agreement he made with the company and 
documentation of the payments made to the company. (Tr at 26-29) At the close of the 
record nothing was submitted.  
  
Applicant has not filed his federal income taxes since 2005. He claims he has not 
filed because he is not familiar with the exact forms he needs. He believes he filed his 
federal income tax returns for 2005. He has not filed federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2006 and 2007. He does not believe he owes any taxes. He anticipates refunds.  
He has not contacted the Internal Revenue Service. (Tr at 44-46) Applicant’s income tax 
issues were not discovered until the hearing. Although not alleged in the SOR, 
Applicant’s income tax issues are considered for determining whether or not any of the 
financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. (See ISCR App. Bd. Dec. 00-0633, 
Oct. 24, 2003, at 3-4) 
 
Applicant intends to pay all of his debts. He has not attended financial 
counseling. He does not maintain a monthly budget. He is apprehensive about seeking 
the assistance of another debt solution company as a result of his recent experience. 
(Tr at 40-41, 50)  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant and his wife live in different cities. She lives near the military installation 
where she is assigned on active duty. He lives in the area where he works. All of the 
children live with his wife. His wife is on terminal leave. Approximately 28 days after the 
hearing, she will separate from active duty. She and the children will move to where 
Applicant resides. She is interviewing for jobs in the area where Applicant resides but 
has received no firm employment offers as of the date of the hearing. (Tr at 17-18) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Since 2006, Applicant accumulated 
approximately $43,811 in delinquent debt. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant continues to have financial problems. Although he made one payment 
towards his past due spousal support payments, he provided no evidence that he is 
maintaining his monthly payment even though the record was held open to allow him to 
do so. The majority of his delinquent accounts remain unresolved.  In addition, it was 
discovered at hearing that Applicant has not filed income tax returns for 2006 and 2007. 
He may owe income taxes for tax year 2005.  This raises further questions about his 
judgment and reliability.   
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant’s November 
2004 marital separation and divorce in April 2007, have had some impact on his 
financial situation. However, his decision to leave a well-paying job overseas prior to 
securing employment in the United States had the most adverse impact on Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
financial situation. After his move, he was unemployed for over 14 months. Better 
planning could have prevented this issue. Applicant testified that he was taken 
advantage of by an unscrupulous debt resolution agency. However, I cannot consider 
this fully without some corroborating evidence. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional evidence, including a copy of the agreement he entered 
into with the debt resolution company, and verification of the payments made to the 
company. Nothing was submitted. Most of Applicant’s financial situation was the result 
of poor planning on his part as opposed to circumstances that were beyond his control.  
For these reasons, FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given less weight. He has no plan in place to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. It was also discovered at hearing that Applicant has 
significant tax problems. His financial problems have been aggravated as a result of 
poor planning and neglect. I cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.   
 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. While Applicant consulted a debt resolution company and 
entered into an agreement, he has not attended any formal financial counseling.  
Financial counseling would assist Applicant in controlling his finances. Although he 
made one payment towards one of his debts, it is unlikely that his financial problems will 
be resolved in the near future due to the extent of the delinquent debt.   
  
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. One payment towards one of the 
debts does not indicate a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors. While Applicant 
claims he had entered into a contract with an unscrupulous debt resolution company, he 
provided no evidence to corroborate his story even though he was given the opportunity 
to do so. Although Applicant promises to pay all of his debts off in the future, a promise 
to pay in the future does not mitigate the concerns under financial considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s nine years 
of honorable service in the United States Air Force. I considered his marital issues over 
the past five years. I considered his periods of unemployment. However, Applicant has 
not demonstrated that he has taken sufficient action to resolve his delinquent accounts. 
The government expects persons who are entrusted to access to classified information 
to fulfill their responsibilities as United States citizens. One of the more important 
responsibilities is to file and pay taxes in a timely manner. It was discovered at hearing 
that Applicant has federal tax issues for tax years 2005, 2006 and 2007. Concerns 
remain under financial considerations because of Applicant’s failure to uphold his duty 
to file and pay federal income taxes as well as his unresolved financial problems. A 
security risk remains because of Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility and the 
lack of action taken towards resolving his delinquent accounts. He has not met his 
burden to mitigate the concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
