                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05925 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On November 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 25, 2008, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on January 8, 2009. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and it was received on January 27, 2009. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case 
was assigned to me on March 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee for a defense contractor. She admitted using 
and purchasing marijuana with varying frequency from about November 2006 until 
November 2007. While employed by a defense contractor and holding a security 
clearance, Applicant was ordered by her employer to take a drug urinalysis in 
November 2007 that tested positive.  
 
 Applicant purchased marijuana about six times from a casual acquaintance she 
had known for more than 20 years. Her purchases were for her personal use. She paid 
about $40 each time she purchased marijuana. She smoked the marijuana with a pipe 
she obtained from the acquaintance. She used it alone and at her home.1  
 
 Approximately a week or two after the positive drug test and admitting to her 
supervisor her marijuana use, Applicant injured her shoulder and was placed on 
medical leave.2 Applicant had surgery for her injury in January 2008.  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management on February 20, 2008, and explained she used marijuana because she 
was under a great deal of stress due to being place in a supervisory position. The use of 
marijuana made her relax and relieved the stress.3 In her answer to the SOR, she 
explained she used marijuana because she was “under a great deal of stress and 
pain.”4 Applicant was aware of her employer’s drug policy.  
 
 Applicant had anticipated attending a substance abuse program after her 
interview, but it was delayed until her doctor released her from medical leave. Applicant 
returned to work on May 19, 2008. She began a drug treatment program in July 2008 
and completed it in October 2008. She indicated that she was required to take random 
urinalyses and attend narcotics anonymous meetings twice a week and attend classes 
three times a week.5 She provided a certificate of completion for “Phase I Intensive 
1 GE 6. 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
5 GE 6. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Outpatient Program Chemical Dependency Treatment” dated October 14, 2008.6 No 
other information was provided about this program. No information was provided as to 
whether there was a diagnosis or a prognosis regarding Applicant’s drug use. Applicant 
indicated in her answer that she is enrolled in the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 
through her company and she is in compliance with the requirements. No independent 
information was provided from the EAP as to what the requirements were and her 
compliance record. She indicated that from October 24, 2008 to the present she was in 
Phase II of an aftercare treatment program. No information was provided as to what this 
involves or the credentials of the program or its counselors. She indicated she will 
continue to take random drug tests and will comply with all treatment necessary.7 In 
answers to interrogatories dated September 15, 2008, Applicant indicated her last use 
of illegal drugs was on November 26, 2007. She also indicated she did not intend to use 
illegal drugs in the future. She also indicated she had learned her lesson and would like 
to put this embarrassment behind her.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 GE 6. 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance from 
approximately November 2006 to November 2007. She purchased marijuana for her 
personal use approximately six times. She tested positive for marijuana use while 
employed by a defense contractor. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
5 
 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended, 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use from November 2006 to November 2007 was 
frequent. She admitted to using marijuana because she felt stress from her job. She has 
not provided any convincing evidence that these conditions are unlikely to recur. It has 
been approximately a year and a half since her last drug use. I do not have any 
evidence other than Applicant’s written response to confirm her abstinence. In addition, 
considering Applicant repeated use of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance, I 
find that her actions cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. Therefore, I find (a) does not apply.  
 
 The burden shifted to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns raised by her 
illegal drug use. She did not provide sufficient evidence to substantiate a demonstrated 
intent not to use drugs in the future. There were no records from her drug treatment 
program or EAP to substantiate any of her written assertions. Although Applicant 
provided a certificate of completion for Phase I of a drug treatment program, there was 
minimal information provided as to what Phase I included, what was the extent of the 
treatment she actually received, whether her drugs test were all negative, whether she 
was diagnosed as drug dependent or otherwise, or if there was a prognosis for her by a 
duly qualified medical professional or a recommendation for further treatment. No 
information was provided as to the accreditation of the program she attended and what, 
if any, the credentials were for counselors she may have seen. No information was 
provided as to whether Applicant still has an association with the person who supplied 
her marijuana or if she has learned an alternative way to deal with her stress. She did 
not provide a signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with automatic 
revocation of clearance if she violated it. Applicant provided a certificate of completion 
 
6 
 
 
of some type of drug treatment program; however, without additional independent 
information to verify that she is drug free, the certificate is insufficient to mitigate the 
security concerns regarding her drug involvement. I find none of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant began using marijuana to 
relieve stress from her job. She continued to use it for approximately a year and while 
holding a secret security clearance. She attended a drug treatment program and 
completed Phase I of it, but no specific information was provided about this program or 
a prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. Applicant has the burden of 
persuasion and failed to provide convincing mitigation. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Appellant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
