1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03532
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
 Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on September
13, 2007. On July 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 3, 2008 and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
and I received the case assignment on October 20, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on November 5, 2008, for a hearing on November 20, 2008. I convened the
hearing as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered eight exhibits (Exhs 1-8) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted two exhibits (Exhs. A and B)
containing multiple documents that were admitted without objection. He testified on his
own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 1, 2008. I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until December 20, 2008, to submit
additional evidence. One post-hearing submission was received within the specified
time after the conclusion of the hearing. It contained three separate documents marked
as A-C) and a faxed supplement (Post Hearing 1). The second post hearing document
was submitted after the deadline and consisted of one document (Post Hearing 2). The
government had no objection to either submission and the documents were admitted in
evidence without objection.
Procedural Rulings
The hearing notice was dated less than 15 days before the hearing date. I
advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before
the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice and indicated
he was ready to proceed (Tr. 7).
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a government contractor working as a
systems engineer designing satellite communications systems. He hold both Bachelor’s
of Science and Master’s degrees in electrical engineering and a Master’s degree in
Business Administration. 
In his answer, Applicant admitted the three of the four allegations in the SOR
concerning two federal tax delinquencies that resulted in liens amounting to
approximately $37,000 and $25,000 respectively and one defaulted mortgage of
approximately $28,000. He denied a state tax lien of approximately $1,000. 
The sequence of events that led to these debts and the actions Applicant is
taking to resolve them follows. 
Applicant completed his education in 1994. During his school years, and before,
he worked in industry for 13 years. He then started his own business which he operated
for ten years until 2004. The first five years were building the business with relatively
low income. He became more successful with some government contracts for small
business innovation research for the second five years but had nine total months of no
income in 2002 and 2004 (Exh. A at p. 7). He concluded in 2004 that the company was
3
under-capitalized and that he should return to steady employment. It was during this ten
year period that he incurred debts and fell behind in payments that gave rise to the
issues in this matter. 
The last two years of self employment, 2003 and 2004, Applicant filed his federal
tax returns but did not pay the taxes but instead paid credit card and other expenses of
cost of living. This failure to pay taxes resulted in the tax liens filed in 2006 and 2007
that are at issue in this matter (SOR ¶ 1. a. and b.).
Applicant’s first employment after he returned to salaried employment was a two
year personal services contract with a sub-contractor for his present employer. The
contract could not be extended so he then obtained employment at a higher salary with
the prime contractor in another city. He has continued to be employed there for the past
18 months with an annual salary ranging from $125,000 to $130,000.
Applicant purchased a home in 2001 while self employed for $423,000. He lived
there until April, 2007, when he moved to his present state of residence. His employer
had a relocation program including efforts to sell property of transferred staff but the
house was not sold. His payments became delinquent in July, 2007, since he was
renting a home in his new location and had increased living expenses (SOR ¶ 1.d.). He
had a variable rate mortgage with a leading mortgage company at the center of the
current housing crisis. The payments had been increased to over $3,300 a month but
were decreased by $400 per month in March, 2008. He made three offers of settlement
of the debt that were rejected by the mortgagor who insisted on a full one-time payment
(Exh. B item 6). Foreclosure was initiated. When a sale date was set for the property, he
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May, 2008, to protect from loss of the property. He still
owns the property and is paying $1,130 per month under the bankruptcy plan to resolve
the delinquent debts. At the time of the hearing he had not rented the property but was
attempting to do so (Tr. 55). Since the hearing the property has been rented and he has
income from the rental of $2,200 per month (Post-hearing submission 2). The debts
now can be extinguished more rapidly with the increased income. The current balance
of the delinquent mortgage payments is $11,700. 
The IRS debts are also included in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He has paid the
bankruptcy trustee since June 2008. At the time of the bankruptcy filing some of these
debts had been paid with his income tax refund for 2007, and the balance is now
reduced to $49,000 (Tr. 18). The original plan indicated that it could be paid off in 60
months with monthly payments. However, the increased income from rental of his
former home indicates that it will be paid off in 40 months.
Applicant’s fourth alleged debt is a state tax lien from Mississippi of
approximately $1,000 that he is disputing (SOR ¶ 1.c.) (Tr. 19). Although he was born in
Mississippi where his parents still live, he has never been employed there and believes
the debt relates to his parents. During the period covered by the assessment, he was
living in two other states in which he paid taxes (Exh. B, Item 7). So far he has been
4
unsuccessful in having the debt removed from his credit report but he continues the
effort (Exh. B of first post-hearing submission).
Applicant was divorced a number of years ago and had no children. He provides
some voluntary financial support to his parents and other relatives. He owns two
automobiles that are fully paid. He does not now hold a security clearance and has
never held one. His employer desires that he have one since his work is limited without
one.
Applicant’s annual salary from his employment is approximately $130,000 after a
$5,000 increase he received in 2008. He is highly regarded by his supervisor who
speaks for the company. He has known Applicant since 2001 when he made a
presentation on behalf of his own company to his present employer. He knows
proprietary and security requirements (Post-hearing submission Attachment A). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), "a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns.”
Applicant did incur substantial delinquent debts and was the subject of two federal
tax liens and a home foreclosure. Thus, the conditions required were established by the
government sufficient to raise a security concern. 
The guideline also includes examples of mitigating conditions (MC) that could
mitigate security concerns arising from financial considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(b), the
security concern may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had endeavored to
create a viable business of his own. He struggled to do so with some success but while
doing so incurred debts that became delinquent. He has since taken action to resolve the
6
debts and to keep possession of the foreclosed home. Thus, I conclude that he has
acted responsibly and the mitigating condition is applicable. 
Under AG ¶ 20(d) the security concern may be mitigated when the individual
initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. From
the evidence presented, this mitigating condition is applicable. 
Under AG ¶ 20(e) the security concern may be mitigated when the individual has
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt that is the cause of the
problem, and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. He has provided evidence of a
reasonable basis for disputing the state tax assessment and has taken, and continues to
take, appropriate action to resolve this issue. This mitigating condition is also applicable. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case.  
Applicant is a mature adult with significant responsibility in his work and a history
of successful accomplishment both in industry and his academic pursuits. The debts
arose under unique circumstances unlikely to be repeated. There is little or no likelihood
of a recurrence of the problem and there is no potential for pressure or exploitation of the
situation.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For  Applicant
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is granted.
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge
