                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05622 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations. Her evidence is 
insufficient to show that she is in control of her finances and she lacks a track record of 
financial responsibility. Moreover, she falsified her security clearance application. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 20, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On October 10, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
1  GE 1.  
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on November 10, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 24, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 8, 2008. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on January 6, 2009. The government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. GEs 1 through 4 were admitted without objection (Tr. 23-25). 
Applicant objected to GE 5, claiming it was not relevant (the judgment referenced did 
not pertain to her). I admitted GE 5, and considered it in light of the record as a whole. 
Applicant testified on her own behalf, and presented 12 exhibits, marked Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) 1 through 12, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 40). DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.j, 
and 1.k. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.l. She failed to answer the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b and I entered a denial. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old office manager/receptionist working for a government 
contractor (GE 1). She married her husband in 1981, they separated in 1989, and were 
divorced in 1993. Applicant and her ex-husband got back together in 1995, but they 
never remarried. He died suddenly in December 2007 (Answer). Applicant has a 22-
year-old son of this marriage. She attended college from 2004 to 2008, and received 
her bachelor’s degree in management in June 2008 (Tr. 6). 
 
Applicant’s work history shows she has been continuously employed from 
September 1988 to the present, except for two periods of unemployment. She was 
unemployed from October 2003 to July 2004 and from October 2005 to December 2005 
(GE 1, Tr. 47-53). She testified she was underemployed from 1988 to February 2006, 
when she was hired by her current employer, a government contractor. She believes 
she received access to classified information around 2005, but by the time her security 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3 
 
clearance was granted she had left her employment. She has never handled classified 
information. 
 
She testified that her unemployment from October 2003 to July 2004, did not 
affect her financially (Tr. 53). In October 2005, she quit her job after realizing she was 
not qualified for the position. She was unemployed from October 2005 to December 
2005 (GE 1, Tr. 47-53). Applicant claimed that around October 2005, her husband 
broke a leg while working as an independent contractor (carpenter), and was 
unemployed for two months. He had no insurance and she had to assume all the 
financial responsibility for the household. In November 2005, she broke her elbow and 
that injury limited her ability to work. She also claimed her son had an accident on or 
about 2005-2006. She attributed her current financial problems to this period of 
unemployment, underemployment, and adverse circumstances.  
  
In 2006, as part of her hiring process, Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application in which she stated having no unpaid judgments and no debts over 180 days 
delinquent during the last seven years. She also stated that at the time she filled out the 
e-QIP, she had no debts over 90 days delinquent. Applicant’s background investigation 
addressed her financial situation and included the review of her e-QIP; her response to 
DOHA interrogatories (GE 2); two credit bureau reports (CBRs) (GEs 3 & 4); and a 
LexisNexis report about an April 1995 judgment (GE 5).  
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately 
$54,000. Applicant admitted most of the debts alleged in SOR are her debts and have 
been delinquent for many years. Applicant explained that during the last five years she 
has had financial problems which were caused by a combination of factors; i.e., two 
periods of unemployment and her underemployment; her husband being out of work 
because of an accident; she was not able to work because of a broken elbow; and the 
expenses associated with her eviction from her mother’s home by her sister (Tr. 42-43). 
Up until she was hired by her current employer, Applicant claimed she did not have the 
money to pay her delinquent debts and to pay for her day-to-day living expenses. She 
only had enough money to survive and to pay for her college education (Tr. 43). 
 
Considering the record as a whole I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e alleged the same 
debt in collection by different collection agencies (Tr. 77).  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d alleged the same debt in collection by different collection 
agencies (Tr. 76). It alleged a judgment entered against Applicant around June 2008 
which is still outstanding. She opened a retail store credit account in 2005, charged 
merchandise to it, and stopped making payments in 2005-2006 (Tr. 67). The debt went 
into collection and the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant. She has made 
three payments since August 2008 to the collection agency (Tr. 67, 74). She missed her 
December 2008 payment because she had to shift her money to buy Christmas 
presents (Tr. 74). 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                          
SOR ¶ 1.c concerns a credit card account she opened in 1996, and stopped 
paying in June 2006. She started making monthly payments of $125 to the collection 
agency in August 2008 (Tr. 75).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f concerns a credit card account she opened in 2003, and stopped 
paying in 2005-2006. She made payment arrangements with the collection agency 
around September 2008 and started making monthly payments of $50 to the collection 
agency in October 2008 (Tr. 78). She missed her December 2008 payment because 
she had to shift her money to buy Christmas presents. 
 
Applicant paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g (Tr. 77) and 1.i (This was a utility 
debt that had been delinquent since 2005. It was paid on October 2008 (Answer)) (Tr. 
84). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a delinquent utility debt she has been carrying since 2006. 
She forgot about the debt when the creditor stopped calling (Tr. 83). The debt is still 
outstanding. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j is a delinquent debt for a computer Applicant purchased in 2004. She 
stopped paying it in November 2005. The debt is still outstanding (Tr. 84). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k concerns an outstanding delinquent debt acquired by her husband in 
2001 to make improvements in their home (Tr. 88). She believed her husband had paid 
the debt and she forgot about it. The debt is still outstanding. 
 
Applicant disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l. The record evidence is not 
sufficient to establish the judgment was imposed against Applicant (GE 5, Tr. 88). 
 
Applicant attended college from 2004 to 2008. She borrowed approximately 
$45,000 from Sallie Mae to pay for her education. She had to pay $5,000 in January 
2007 to be able to graduate. She is making monthly payments of $225. She missed her 
December 2008 payment because she had to shift her money to buy Christmas 
presents (Tr. 85-86). 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant falsified question 273 of her March 2008 
security clearance application (asking whether in the last seven years she had any 
unpaid judgments), when she answer “No,” and failed to disclose the judgments alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.l. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was not imposed until June 
2008. There record evidence fails to show the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l pertains to 
Applicant. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 2.b, I find that Applicant deliberately falsified question 28 of 
her March 2008 security clearance application (asking whether in the last seven years 
3  There is a typographical error in SOR ¶ 2.a. It alleged that Applicant falsified e-QIP question 28, when 
in fact it quoted question 27. 
 
 
5 
 
she had been over 180 days delinquent on any debts). She answer “No,” and failed to 
disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b (same as 1.d), 1.c (same as 1.e), 1.f - 1.h, 
1.j, and 1.k. Almost all the above mentioned debts had been delinquent since 2005-
2006.  
 
Applicant admitted she failed to disclose her delinquent debts, but claimed she 
failed to disclose them because of negligence and not because she intended to mislead 
or falsify her security clearance application (Tr. 41-42, 44). She knew she had a number 
of delinquent debts, but when she was filling out her e-QIP she could not remember the 
details of her debts (Tr. 90). She explained she was rushing when she was filling out the 
application, did not have access to a CBR, and did not think thoroughly when providing 
her answers. 
 
Applicant testified she participated in a debt consolidation/settlement program 
from July 2004 to October 2005 that included all the alleged delinquent debts, except 
one (Tr. 69-70). She stopped participating because she did not have the means to pay 
the scheduled payments. Applicant testified that this is not the first time she has had 
financial problems. She explained that many years ago, she had financial problems and 
was able to resolve her financial problems through her participation in a debt 
consolidation program. Other than during her participation in the debt consolidation 
programs, Applicant has received no financial counseling. She presented no 
documentary evidence to support her participation in either debt consolidation program. 
 
Applicant did not make any payments on her delinquent debts from February 
2006 (when she was hired by her current employer) to August 2008, because she did 
not have the financial means to pay her old debts and her day-to-day living expenses 
(Tr. 100-102). She was using all available income to support herself and pay for her 
educational expenses. In 2008, she took a part-time job to increase her income and pay 
her delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant believes she is doing all she can under the circumstances to pay her 
debts. Her plan is to pay the delinquent debts she now has under payment plans first 
and then address the remainder of her debts. She promised to use any future pay 
increases to resolve her debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
 
 
6 
 
                                                          
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
4  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
5  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
 
7 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is well documented in her credit reports, her SOR 
response, her response to the DOHA interrogatory, and her testimony. On or about 
2000, she acquired numerous debts which became delinquent and have remained 
outstanding for many years. As of the hearing date, she had 7 outstanding debts 
totaling approximately $36,000. Additionally, she owes approximately $45,000 in 
educational loans. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
 
 
8 
 
                                                          
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,6 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant presented little evidence of efforts taken to contact 
creditors, or to resolve any of the debts since she acquired them until after she received 
the SOR. Although she participated in two debt consolidation programs, her evidence is 
insufficient to show that she has participated in meaningful financial counseling.   
 
I specifically considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 20(b) 
and conclude it applies, but only to a limited extent. Applicant’s testimony established 
factors that may be considered as circumstances beyond her control contributing to her 
inability to pay her debts, i.e., her periods of unemployment and underemployment; the 
accidents suffered by her, her husband, and her son; and her eviction from her mother’s 
home. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she has dealt 
responsibly with her financial obligations from the time she acquired the debt until after 
her receipt of the SOR. Applicant has been consistently employed since 1988, except 
for the above mentioned periods of unemployment. Since 2006, she has been 
meaningfully employed by a government contractor. Nevertheless, she only presented 
some evidence to show paid debts, settlements, documented negotiations, completed 
payment plans, or meaningful financial assistance/counseling with respect to her SOR 
debts. Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that 
she has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that she has taken 
control of her financial situation. Considering the record as a whole, I find she is 
financially overextended. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG ¶ 15.  
 
Applicant did not omit information in her answer to questions 27 of her security 
clearance application. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a (also alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b) 
6  See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
 
9 
 
was not imposed until June 2008. There record evidence fails to show the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l pertains to Applicant. I find for Applicant in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Applicant omitted relevant information in her answers to question 28 of her 
security clearance application. Considering the record as a whole, I find Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b (same as 1.d), 1.c 
(same as 1.e), 1.f - 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k. She acquired these debts and stopped paying them 
when she quit her job and was unemployed for two months. Almost all the above 
mentioned debts have been delinquent since 2005-2006. She claimed that all but one of 
these debts were included in a debt consolidation program she participated in until 
October-December 2005. She submitted her security clearance application in March 
2006. She clearly must have known about all her delinquent debts when she submitted 
her e-QIP. In light of Applicant’s education, maturity, her employment history, and her 
demeanor and testimony, I find she knew about the debts and chose to ignore them.  
 
Applicant knew or should have known the importance of accurately completing 
her security clearance application and telling the truth. Nevertheless, she failed to 
provide information that was material to making an informed security decision and made 
a false statement. AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,” applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
 
10 
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none applies to this case. 
Applicant made no effort to correct her omissions. I do not believe her claims that her 
failure to disclose the information was due to carelessness or rushing when completing 
her application. Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s explanations are not 
credible. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find it does not apply since her 
behavior is recent and shows Applicant’s lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). 
Applicant’s two years employment with a government contractor weighs in her 
favor. There is no evidence to show that she has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. Aside from her delinquent debts (which are a civil, 
non-criminal issue), she is a law-abiding citizen. She expressed regret for her financial 
mistakes, and since August 2008 she has been trying to correct them. She has paid 
some of her debts and contacted creditors to establish payment plans for other debts. 
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in her case, including Applicant’s 
age, education, and maturity, she demonstrated a lack of judgment and trustworthiness 
 
 
11 
 
in the handling of her financial affairs. Although she established circumstances beyond 
her control that contributed to her financial problems, she failed to deal responsibly with 
her financial obligations until after receipt of her SOR. Moreover, Applicant deliberately 
falsified her security clearance application. Applicant knew or should have known the 
importance of the trust to be placed on her by the government. Notwithstanding, she 
failed to be candid and honest on her security clearance application. Her behavior 
shows she lacks judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations and personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
    
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c, 1.f, 1.h, 
    1.j, and 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e,1.g, 
   1.i, and 1.l:     For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
