         
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
   
   
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05034 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who possesses and regularly uses her 
Israeli passport, and intends to retain it. Her contact with four siblings who are citizens 
and residents of Israel is neither casual nor infrequent. Three of these siblings work for 
the Israeli government. From 1982 through 2007, Applicant visited Israel every two or 
three years. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns 
under foreign preference and foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 13, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
foreign preference and foreign influence. 
  
 On August 29, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
October 29, 2008, DOHA assigned the case. On November 6, 2009, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on November 19, 2008. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through L, which were admitted into evidence.  
 
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On 
December 1, 2008, additional documents were received. There being no objection, the 
material was admitted into evidence as Ex. M. On November 26, 2008, the transcript 
(Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the factual allegations of the SOR. 
Applicant is a 61-year-old senior principal software engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since July 1979, and is seeking to maintain a secret security 
clearance she has had for 24 years. (Tr. 13) She is a wife, mother, and grandmother. 
Since being hired in 1979, Applicant has never changed jobs, but has worked for six 
different companies. (Tr. 15)  
 
Applicant’s manager, co-workers, and acquaintances state Applicant is 
responsible, reliable, conscientious, competent, hard working, trustworthy, of high 
character, and one of the best software engineers. (Ex A, B, L) She is enthusiastic, 
diligent, and willing to put in extra hours to get the job done. (Ex C) She has received 
five awards for outstanding achievement and two certificates of excellent for her job 
performance. (Ex D-H) Between 1993 and 2006, her job performance has been rated as 
“Exceeds Performance Expectations” and “Continually Exceeds Expectations.” (Ex I, J) 
 
 Applicant’s mother was a British citizen and her father was a French citizen. 
Applicant was born in Libya. Neither her parents nor Applicant were ever Libyan 
citizens. (Tr. 32) Her parent moved to Israel and became Israeli citizens when Applicant 
was six months old. (Tr. 33) (Gov Ex 1) From 1967 to 1974, Applicant attended 
university in Israel. In 1974, she received a master’s degree in physics. (Tr. 15) From 
1970 to 1975, Applicant worked for the Meteorological Service in Israel and from 1975 
through 1979, worked for an Israeli military industry.  
 
In 1979, she immigrated to the U.S. because her husband wanted to return to the 
U.S. Applicant has been married to a native U.S. citizen since May 1976. Her husband 
is retired. (Tr. 45) Applicant’s daughter born in 1977 in Israel is a dual Israeli – U.S. 
 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
                                                          
citizen. (Tr. 30) Her daughter is married to a lieutenant commander in the U.S. Navy 
and is currently living in Japan. (Tr. 35 – 36) In May 1984, Applicant became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. (Gov Ex 1) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. Her mother died in 2000. Applicant has five 
siblings and maintains contact with four of them. (Tr. 24) Her older brother, two younger 
brothers, and two younger sisters are a citizens and residents of Israel. Her older 
brother, a scientist researching air pollution, was born in Libya, but moved to Israel at 
age two. He is an Israeli government employee and has been such for 30 to 35 years. 
(Tr. 28) Another brother is an artist and graphic designer, and the third brother is a 
computer engineer, who is an Israeli government employee and has been so for 25 
years. (Tr. 28) This brother works for the defense ministry. (Tr. 34)  
 
One sister works part-time as an office worker for the Israeli equivalent of the 
social security administration and is an Israeli government employee. (Tr. 28) This sister 
has been an Israeli government employee for 15 years. (Tr. 28) Her other sister is a 
bookkeeper who she has not had contact with since 2001. 
 
Applicant contacts her brothers and one sister monthly by email every month or 
every other month and visits them in person every two years. (Tr. 37) She has no 
telephone contact with them. (Tr. 29)  
 
In 1979, Applicant obtained an Israeli passport when she left Israel to allow her to 
enter and exit Israel. She renewed that passport in 1989 and 1999. (Tr. 26-27) The 
passport expires in November 2009. (Gov Ex 2) Applicant visited Israel in 2007, 2006, 
2004, 2002, 2000 when she visited her mother’s grave side service. Applicant tries to go 
to Israel every two years. (Tr. 25) She visited between one week and one month on 
each trip. She used her Israeli passport on these trips and only uses it to enter or leave 
Israel. All other travel is done on her U.S passport. (Tr. 42) Between 1984 and 1999, 
she visited Israel every two to three years. (Tr. 26) She came to the U.S. in 1979 and 
visited Israel in 1982, 1985, 1989, 1991, when her father died, 1994 and 1997. 
 
 Applicant is not willing to renounce here Israeli citizenship. (Tr. 30) In September 
2007, during a personal subject interview, Applicant stated she would renounce her 
Israeli passport if needed for her employment and security clearance because her 
employment was most important. (Gov Ex 2) At the hearing, Applicant stated she would  
destroy or turn over her passport to her company security officer, if that was necessary. 
(Tr. 31) There is no evidence this was done.    
 
 Applicant owns a home in the U.S. with a fair market value of $161,000. 
Applicant has $456,000 in her company 401(k) retirement plan. Applicant maintains a 
bank account2 in Israel that is in excess of $10,000, which she inherited from her 
mother. (Tr. 29)  
 
2 The exact size of this account was not established in the record.  
 
 
 
4
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 9 articulates the security concerns relating 
to foreign preference problems: 
  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 AG & 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
  (1) possession and/or use of a foreign passport; 
  (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
  (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
  (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
  (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
  (6) seeking or holding political office in the foreign country; and 
  (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
  
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States; for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United states citizenship. 
 
In 1979, Applicant left Israel. Before she left, she obtained an Israeli passport, 
which she has renewed in 1989 and 1999. Her current Israeli passport, which she still 
possesses, does not expire until November 2009. Until 1984, when she became a U.S. 
citizen, it was appropriate for Applicant to maintain her Israeli passport. Between 1984 
and 2007, she visited Israel every two to three years. She entered and exited Israel 
 
 
 
6
using her Israel passport. Applicant asserts she can not use her U.S. passport to enter 
or exit Israel. Her only use of her Israeli passport is for travel to and from Israel. All other 
travel is done on her U.S. passport.  
 
During a 2007 personal interview, Applicant said she would surrender her Israeli 
passport if she needed to do so in order to keep her job and clearance. At the hearing, 
Applicant stated she was unwilling to surrender her Israeli citizenship, but would 
surrender her Israeli passport if she had to in order to keep her clearance. However, the 
Israeli passport was never surrendered.  
 
AG & 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country; 
   
(b) individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred 
before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based 
solely on her parent’s citizenship. &11(a) does not apply. Applicant is unwilling to 
renounce her dual citizenship. &11(b) does not apply. Her renewal and use of her Israeli 
passport occurred after becoming a U.S. citizen and as recently as 2007 when she 
visited Israel. &11(c) does not apply. Her use of the Israeli passport is not approved by 
a cognizant security authority. &11(d) does not apply. Applicant still maintains 
possession of the Israeli passport. &11(e) does not apply. There is no evidence of 
Applicant never having voted in a foreign election so &11(f) does not apply. 
 
I find against Applicant as to foreign preference because Applicant renewed her 
foreign passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, used it to travel numerous times to 
Israel, and maintains an Israeli passport, and is reluctant to renounce her Israeli 
citizenship.  
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
 
 
7
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
In every case where a sibling lives overseas, there is a risk of pressure on this 
relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of 
this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation pressure, or 
coercion is substantiated. Applicant has five siblings who are citizens and residents of 
Israel. Applicant lives with her husband in the U.S. and her daughter is a dual U.S.—
Israeli citizen.  
 
Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could possibly raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” and AG & 7(b) 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information” apply. 
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
 
 
 
8
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
None of the mitigating factors apply. In 1979, Applicant left Israel and in 1984, 
became a U.S. citizen and obtained a secret security clearance. She has been with the 
same employer since 1979 and her work performance has been outstanding. Between 
1984 and 2007, she visited Israel every two to three years. She entered and exited 
Israel using her Israel passport, which she renewed it in 1989 and 1999 and which does 
not expire until November 2009.  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) && 8(a) does not apply except as to her sister with 
whom Applicant no longer has contact. Applicant emails her other siblings every month 
or every other month and has personal contact every two years. In the future, she 
intends to continue visiting Israel every two or three years. Her contact with her siblings 
is neither casual nor infrequent. AG && 8(a) and 8 (c) do not apply. 
 
The positions of her siblings must also be considered. Three of her siblings 
currently worked for the Israeli government and have done so for 15, 25, and 30—35 
years. Her sister works part-time as an office worker for the Israeli equivalent of the 
social security administration and has worked there for 15 years. Her one brother is a 
scientist researching air pollution who has been Israeli government employee for 30 to 
35 years. Another brother works as a computer engineer for the defense ministry and 
been an Israeli employee for 25 years. These Israeli government employees provide 
concern.  
 
Applicant has lived in the U.S. 29 years and lived in Israel 32 years. She owns a 
home in the U.S. worth $161,000 and has a sizable 401(k) retirement account. She 
maintains a bank account in Israel, which contains an amount in excess of $10,000. 
How much in excess of $10,000 is unknown. Not knowing the value of the property in 
Israel, I am unable to find the value of her financial interest in Israel is as minimal as it is 
unlikely to result in a conflict or could influence Applicant. I find && 8(f) and 8 (b) do not 
apply.  
 
 
 
 
9
 Contact with her siblings was not the result of U.S. Government business. &&8(d) 
does not apply. There is no evidence as to whether Applicant has or has not promptly 
complied existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or 
threats from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. && 8(e) does not 
apply.  
 
 Her close contact with four of her siblings, three of whom work for the Israeli 
government, with no applicable mitigating factors, I find against Applicant as to foreign 
influence.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The Awhole person@ 
analysis in a Guideline B and C case should include the totality of an applicant=s 
conduct and circumstances. 
 
As indicated in the statement of facts, there are countervailing, positive attributes 
to Applicant=s life as a U.S. citizen that weigh towards granting a clearance. Applicant 
has close ties to the United States. She has had the same job for 29 year and held a 
clearance 24 years. Her closest family member is her husband, a U.S. citizen, who lives 
with her. Her daughter, a dual U.S.—Israeli citizen is married to a U.S. Naval officer 
stationed in Japan.  
 
Applicant was born in Libya and spent her formative years and early adulthood 
living in Israel. In 1974, she obtained her master’s degree in physics in Israel. She 
worked for the Israeli Meteorological Service and for an Israeli military industry before 
coming to the U.S in 1979, at age 32. 
 
 
 
 
10
She has five siblings in Israel, four whom she contacts regularly. She intends to 
visit Israel every two or three years. Three of Applicant’s siblings work for the Israeli 
government. Her sister works part-time as an office worker for the Israeli equivalent of a 
social security and has worked there for 15 years. Her contact with her four siblings is 
neither casual nor infrequent. Additionally, she maintains an Israeli passport.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a -1.d:  Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
