 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00108 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP), on January 18, 2007. On September 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 28, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on December 23, 2008.  The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on December 
29, 2008.  Applicant received the FORM on January 5, 2009. He had 30 days from 
receipt of the FORM to submit any additional material.  He did not respond. The FORM 
was forwarded to the hearing office on February 26, 2009 and assigned to me on March 
 
2 
 
 
3, 2009.   Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 28, 2008, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. He denies SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 2.a, and 2.b. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance.  He has been employed with the defense 
contractor since August 1995. Prior to this job, he served on active duty in the United 
States Army, retiring after over 20 years of active duty service. He is married and has 
four children. (Item 4)   
 
On January 18, 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Security Investigations Processing, e-QIP. He answered “No” in response to Section 
28.a “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and 
“No” in response to Section 28.b “Are you currently 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” 
(Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts: 
a $997 credit card account charged off in April 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 
3, 5); a $1,721 delinquent cell phone account placed for collection in September 2003 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 8); a $1,264 cable television account placed for 
collection in November 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 6, 9); an $8,265 amount 
owed from an automobile repossession that was charged off in January 2004 (SOR ¶ 
1.d: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 6); a $676 delinquent cell phone account that was placed  for 
collection in January 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 8 at 9); and a $123,000 debt owed to the 
Internal Revenue Service for tax years 1984 – 1990. (Item 8 at 4; Item 5.)   
 
Applicant stated that he and his wife filed federal tax returns for tax years 1984 – 
1990, but did not pay the taxes owed. He also did not pay his state income taxes for 
those years. His state tax debt was resolved through garnishment of his wages. In 
2005, Applicant and his wife hired a tax attorney. Applicant claims the attorney did not 
do much towards resolving the tax problem. They eventually fired the attorney and 
attempted to negotiate a payment plan with the IRS on their own. At some point, they 
hired another financial company to represent them due to the complicated process. The 
IRS levied his wages in April 2007 but the levy was released in June 2007. He stated 
that all of his other delinquent bills resulted from the IRS levy of his wages. He was 
unable to catch up on his bills. On October 18, 2007, one his sons got into trouble which 
resulted in a strain on his family finances. He intends to resolve all of his delinquent 
accounts. (Item 5; Answer to SOR.) No information was provided regarding Applicant’s 
current financial status.  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies that he owes the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. He claims to have resolved it six years ago. He provided no documentation 
 
3 
 
 
verifying payment. He denies owing the cable television bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He 
admits owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1d, and 1.e. He intends to resolve these 
accounts. He has been negotiating with the IRS pertaining to $123,000 tax debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. The current status of negotiations is unknown. He states that he is a 
retired American soldier and would never compromise classified information. (Answer to 
SOR) 
 
Applicant claims that he did not indicate that he had delinquent debts on his e-
QIP application due to oversight. He claims he listed the delinquent accounts in a prior 
security clearance application completed in 2004, but overlooked them on his current e-
QIP application. (Answer to SOR) He provided no information about his work 
performance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant’s unresolved accounts date 
back to 1984. He owes the IRS approximately $123,000 for seven years of unpaid 
federal income taxes. He provided no proof that the delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR are resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s has a history of financial irresponsibility. Although he began to attempt to 
resolve his delinquent federal income taxes in 2005, he neglected to do so for over 15 
years. The other delinquent accounts remain unresolved. His failure to timely pay his 
federal income taxes over a period of seven years, and his unresolved delinquent 
accounts cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s 
financial issues remain. He has not provided proof that any of the debts are resolved.  
 
5 
 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because Applicant 
mentioned his son encountered some trouble in December 2007 which created a 
financial burden for the family. However, Applicant had unresolved delinquent accounts 
for years prior to this event. He also states that he was unable to pay his delinquent 
accounts because his wages were levied by the IRS from April to June 2007. This is not 
a circumstance beyond his control. It was within Applicant’s control to pay his taxes in a 
timely manner. In addition, the debts became delinquent several years prior to his 
wages being levied. FC MC ¶20(b) is given very little weight.   
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling.  It is unlikely that his financial problems will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply.  Applicant indicates that he intends 
to resolve these accounts but has provided no verification that any of the delinquent 
accounts were resolved. He has been working to resolve his IRS tax debt for the past 
several years. However, these debts were incurred between 1984 - 1990. Applicant did 
not explain why he failed to resolve or pay his delinquent federal income tax debts prior 
to this time.     
 
Applicant’s failure to honor his financial obligations to his creditors remains a 
security concern. He has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his 
delinquent debts that were over 180 days old in response to section 28(a) and his 
delinquent debts that were currently 90 days old in response to section 28(b) on his e-
QIP application, dated January 18, 2007. Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 
17(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
 
6 
 
 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) applies to this allegation. Applicant’s explanation that he forgot to list his 
delinquent accounts due to oversight conflicts with his testimony that he began to 
resolve his delinquent federal tax debts several years prior to submitting the e-QIP 
application in 2007. All of the other delinquent accounts were incurred years prior to 
Applicant completing his e-QIP application. I do not find Applicant’s explanations for 
omitting his delinquent debts on his e-QIP application credible. None of the mitigating 
conditions apply under Guideline E.  
 
Guideline E is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided no information 
about his work performance. At the close of the record, Applicant provided little 
evidence that he has taken steps to resolve his delinquent accounts. There was 
insufficient evidence to conclude any of the accounts were resolved. Conflicting 
statements in the case file indicate Applicant was aware that he had delinquent 
accounts at the time he completed his e-QIP application. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINSTAPPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
