KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: An applicant who decides to represent himself at a hearing cannot later complain about
the quality of his own representation.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he was denied a fair
opportunity to present his case.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 08-02653.a1
DATE: 03/25/2009
DATE: March 25, 2009
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-02653
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 15, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On January 14, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Matthew E.
Malone denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to
the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
Specifically, Applicant contends that he was harmed by his failure to hire an attorney to
represent him at the hearing.  Applicant also argues that the Judge should have found that the SOR
allegations against him were mitigated.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  Applicant retired from federal
civilian employment in 2003 with 32 years of service.  In 2005, he obtained a job with a private firm.
In July 2007, as part of his job, Applicant purchased three cases of diesel oil.  He deposited two cases
in the appropriate locker at work.  Applicant drove home with one case of the oil still in his truck
and put it in his garage.  When asked the next day by his supervisor if he had taken the oil, Applicant
denied doing so.  Applicant later admitted to his supervisor that he had lied and was suspended and
later fired.  On August 28, 2007, Applicant filled out a security clearance application as part of the
application for his current job and intentionally omitted the fact that he had been fired from his
previous job.  In mid-December, Applicant admitted to his boss that he had lied on his security
clearance application.  On December 28, 2007, Applicant admitted the lie to a government
investigator who was going over the application with him, but not until they reached the appropriate
question on the application.
In addition to Applicant’s lengthy career as a Federal employee, he also had a successful
career in the United States Army and National Guard.  Applicant also submitted a letter of
recommendation from the boss to whom he admitted that he had lied on his security clearance.
Applicant contends that he was harmed by his failure to hire an attorney to represent him at
the hearing.  Applicant states that he believed that he was prepared for the hearing, but after the
hearing started, he realized that he should have retained an attorney.  Since the hearing, Applicant
has concluded “the government is heavily favored.”  
Prior to the hearing, Applicant was sent a memorandum entitled “Preliminary Guidance for
DOHA Industrial Security Clearance (ISCR) Hearings and Trustworthiness (ADP) Hearings.”  The
first numbered paragraph of that memorandum advises applicants that “the government is normally
represented by an attorney known as a Department Counsel.  The Applicant has the option of
appearing by himself or herself without an attorney, or being represented by an attorney selected and
paid for by the Applicant, or by being represented by a Personal Representative such as a friend,
family member, or union representative.”  At the hearing, Applicant testified that he had completed
3
high school and earned an Associate’s Degree.  Transcript at 6.  He also testified that he had received
a copy of the Directive and the pre-hearing guidance and that he had read and understood them.
Transcript at 8.  The Judge found that Applicant was able to represent himself.  Id.  The record
indicates that Applicant submitted evidence and actively participated in the hearing.  During the
hearing, Applicant never indicated that he was unable to represent himself.  Considering the record
as a whole, the Board concludes Applicant waived his right to be represented by an attorney.  
An applicant who decides to represent himself at a hearing cannot later complain about the
quality of his own representation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0086 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2000).
A review of the record in this case shows that Applicant had a reasonable opportunity to prepare for
the hearing and to present evidence on his own behalf, and Applicant has not demonstrated
otherwise.  Merely because Applicant has decided , with the benefit of hindsight, that he could have
presented a better case if he had been represented by an attorney, it does not follow that Applicant
was denied the opportunity to prepare and present his case.  Applicant has not demonstrated error
in this regard.  See Dusanek v. Hannon, 677 F.2d 538, 542-43 (7  Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S.th
1017 (1982).
Applicant also argues that the Judge should have found his conduct to be mitigated because
he regrets the conduct and is rehabilitated and because the conduct is an isolated incident and is so
remote.  The Judge considered the considered Applicant’s evidence of mitigation.  However, the
presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security
clearance.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether
the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 07-10454 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2008). 
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
recency and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct.  The Judge considered the possible application
of relevant mitigating conditions and discussed why he did not apply them in Applicant’s case.  The
Judge explained why the evidence Applicant presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome
the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29,  2005).
Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guideline E is sustainable.
4
Order
The Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                     
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
