                                                              
 
1 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
 --------------------------------1   ) ISCR Case No. 08-05668 
 SSN: -----------   ) 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the United States. Applicant, her parents, her husband and 
her siblings all have connections to Nigeria. However, none of them currently reside in 
Nigeria and none of them intend to permanently reside in Nigeria. She terminated her 
access to her Nigerian passport. She has significantly greater contacts with the United 
States than with Nigeria. She can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of U.S. interests. Foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2006, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (e-
QIP version) (hereinafter SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On November 28, 2008, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to her, alleging security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B 
(Foreign Influence) (GE 5). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
1Applicant married on November 21, 2008 (Tr. 36). The statement of reasons reflects her maiden 
name.   
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as 
amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On December 12, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge (GE 6). Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on February 11, 2009. The case was assigned to me on February 12, 2009. On 
February 18, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice. The hearing was held on March 10, 
2009. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits (GEs 1-3) (Transcript 
(Tr.) 22-25), and Applicant offered 13 exhibits (Tr. 27-31; AE A-M). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GEs 1-2 (Tr. 23, 25), and AEs A-M (Tr. 31). Additionally, I 
admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and the hearing notice (GEs 4-6). I received 
the transcript on March 19, 2009.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (hereinafter Nigeria) (Tr. 24-25; GE 3). Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents to show detail and context for these facts in the 
Administrative Notice request. Applicant and Department Counsel did not object to me 
taking administrative notice of all of the facts in all of the documents (Tr. 25-26; GE 3).  
See the Nigeria section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material 
facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on Nigeria. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings, is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in her response to the SOR (GE 5). Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant was born in the United States (Tr. 15, GE 1). She is 26 years old (Tr. 
5). She left the United States and went to Nigeria when she was three years old. She 
attended most of her grammar and high school in Nigeria. In 1999, she graduated from 
a high school in Malaysia (Tr. 5, 18; GE 1). Applicant attended college and university in 
the United States (Tr. 6). She majored in computer science and received her bachelor’s 
degree (Tr. 6). In May 2009, she expects to complete her master’s degree in systems 
engineering at a U.S. university (Tr. 20, 38-39). When Applicant held an interim 
clearance she scrupulously protected information and documents (Tr. 21). She does not 
currently hold a security clearance (Tr. 6, 21).  
 
Applicant’s father and mother are citizens of Nigeria (GE 6; SOR ¶ 2(a)). Her 
parents currently reside in a Western European country (GE 6; SOR ¶ 2(a)). Her father 
is currently a Nigerian government employee, and he has been a Nigerian government 
employee for more than 26 years (Tr. 32; GE 6; SOR ¶ 2(b)). He is in administration and 
management and not involved in setting Nigerian policy (Tr. 33). Her parents own a 
house in Nigeria (Tr. 34). They rent their home to tenants (Tr. 34). Her father intends to 
retire from his Nigerian government employment in about a year (Tr. 19). Her parents 
plan to move to the United States (Tr. 20, 34). On February 20, 2008, Applicant filed an 
immigrant petition on behalf of her parents and they will be applying for permanent U.S. 
residency (Tr. 20, 34; AE B, C). She frequently communicates with her parents (Tr. 41).    
 
On November 21, 2008, Applicant married a native-born, U.S. citizen (Tr. 20, 36). 
Her husband served five years on active duty in the U.S. Marines (Tr. 20, 36). After 
leaving active duty, her husband continued his college education, and moved with 
Applicant to the East Coast (Tr. 20). A defense contractor is now employing him (Tr. 20, 
36-37). He has held a security clearance without a security incident for more than ten 
years (Tr. 37).   
 
Applicant and her husband do not own any property or bank accounts in Nigeria 
(Tr. 34, 39). Applicant and her husband have bank accounts in the United States (Tr. 
39). Her husband has weekly conversations with his parents, who live in Nigeria (Tr. 
39). 
 
Applicant’s sister was born in the United States, and her brother was born in 
Nigeria (Tr. 15). Applicant lived in the United States for three years before her parents, 
and Applicant returned to Nigeria (Tr. 16). In 1998, Applicant’s father was posted to 
Malaysia and Applicant completed high school in Malaysia (Tr. 17-18). After graduating 
from high school in 1999, Applicant and her sister moved in with her uncle and attended 
college in the United States (Tr. 18). Applicant attended college and a university for five 
years (Tr. 18). During her college years, she tutored children in math, English, and 
college students in algebra and trigonometry (Tr. 18). She also interned at a 
government agency and a defense contractor (Tr. 18).  
 
Applicant’s brother is currently attending college in the United States and her 
sister is a PhD candidate at a U.S. university (Tr. 19). Her brother was recently injured 
in Europe, and he has not returned to the United States (Tr. 35). Her sister went to 
Europe to take care of her brother (Tr. 35-36). 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
In December 2008, Applicant went to Nigeria to visit her husband’s parents (Tr. 
37). She stayed at her husband’s parent’s home (Tr. 38). She used her U.S. passport to 
enter Nigeria (Tr. 37). She stayed in Nigeria for three weeks (Tr. 37). Her father-in-law is 
a retired university professor and her mother-in-law owns a clothing store (Tr. 42).  
 
Applicant provided seven character recommendations (AE D-K), and an 
Individual Excellence Award from her employer (AE L). Most of the letters are from 
peers and supervisors at her employment, and one letter is from her roommate (AE J). 
The letters laud her dedication, responsibility, trustworthiness, professionalism, 
initiative, initiative, leadership, reliability, integrity, and active involvement in the 
community.  
 
Foreign preference 
 
 Applicant obtained a Nigerian passport on March 28, 2000, and subsequently 
renewed it causing it to remain valid until March 26, 2010 (GE 6; SOR ¶ 1.a). She used 
her Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria in December 2003 and December 2005 (GE 6; 
SOR ¶ 1.b). She lived in Nigeria from 1985 to 1998 she lived in Nigeria about 13 years 
(GE 6; SOR ¶ 1.c). On February 24, 2009, Applicant and her facility security officer 
signed a statement indicating she had destroyed or invalidated her Nigerian passport, 
and promised not to possess a foreign passport while holding a security clearance (AE 
A).   
 
Nigeria3 
 
Nigeria is a federal republic that gained independence from Britain in 1960.  
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with a population in 2007 of 148 million. 
The country’s area is about the same as California, Nevada, and Arizona combined. 
The United States is Nigeria’s largest trading partner. Oil imports from Nigeria to the 
United States account for 11% of U.S. oil imports. The United States is the largest 
foreign investor in Nigeria, and U.S. investment is mostly in mining and petroleum.    
 
“The [Nigerian] government has lent strong diplomatic support to U.S. 
Government counter-terrorism efforts in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, 
terrorist attacks. . . An estimated one million Nigerians and Nigerian Americans live 
study and work in the United States, while over 25,000 Americans live and work in 
Nigeria.”  
 
Nigeria suffers from political instability, economic crisis, ethnic and religious 
conflict, extreme poverty, lack of law and order, judicial corruption and a history of 
military coups. Nigeria has a poor human rights record. The military has ruled Nigeria 
for 28 of its 43 years since independence. In May 1999, Nigeria returned to civilian rule. 
Nigeria is Africa’s largest oil producer, and conflict results from perceptions of uneven 
and/or unfair distribution of oil revenue.  Lawless elements have engaged in kidnapping 
 
3The facts in the section concerning Nigeria, except for the first two paragraphs, are from 
Department Counsel’s factual summary (GE 3). The first two paragraphs are from the U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of African Affairs, Background Note: Nigeria, Dec. 2008 (Ex. 3, part. I). 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
for ransom in the Niger Delta area. Heavily armed rival militias engage in conflict. The 
Nigerian government has committed human rights violations, and security forces have 
committed politically motivated, extrajudicial killings as well as torture and arbitrary 
arrest.     
 
The Niger Delta states are particularly noted for kidnappings by lawless 
elements. In 2008, the Nigerian Government detained U.S. citizens on six separate 
occasions after travel to the Niger Delta Region. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence) are the 
relevant security concerns with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 articulates the Government’s concern about foreign preference, stating, 
“when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country 
over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” Conditions under AG ¶ 
10 that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case include: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests 
in another country; 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and  
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and, 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant became a U.S. citizen by virtue of her birth in the United States. Her 
parents took her to Nigeria, where she was raised, received educational benefits, and 
exercised other attributes of Nigerian citizenship. She retained a Nigerian passport after 
immigrating back to the United States in 1999, and used it in 2003 and 2005 to enter 
Nigeria. Disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10a(3) apply. 
 
Under AG ¶ 11, conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
Applicant’s exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of Nigerian citizenship 
occurred when Applicant was a minor, except for her possession and use of her 
Nigerian passport in 2003 and 2005 to enter Nigeria. On February 24, 2009, Applicant 
and her facility security officer signed a statement indicating she had destroyed or 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
invalidated her Nigerian passport, and she promised not to possess a foreign passport 
while holding a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 11(c) and 11(e) apply, and foreign preference 
security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant was born in the United States and moved to Nigeria when she was 
three years old. Most of the next 13 years were spent in Nigeria. She graduated from a 
Malaysian high school in 1999, and immigrated to the United States. She used a 
Nigerian passport to enter Nigeria in 2003 and 2005. Her parents and brother are 
citizens of Nigeria, and her father is a Nigerian government official. Her husband’s 
parents are residents and citizens of Nigeria. She communicates frequently with her 
parents, and her husband communicates frequently with his parents.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person living in a foreign country 
or who is a citizen of a foreign country, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country, and an Applicant 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for 
foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. 
See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 
(App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Nigeria with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her and her 
husband’s relationship with family members who are citizens of Nigeria or living in 
Nigeria do not pose a security risk. Applicant’s father is a Nigerian government official 
and as such he is dependent upon the Nigerian government for his salary and possible 
retirement benefits. Applicant should not be placed into a position where she might be 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to protect her family 
members or her husband’s family living in a foreign country from harm, pressure or 
coercion.4 With its negative human rights record, and high levels of crime in Nigeria  as 
well as other political, economic and military problems in this country, it is conceivable 
that anyone living in Nigeria might be targeted by governmental or non-governmental 
criminal elements in an attempt to gather information from the United States. 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Nigeria seek 
classified or economic information from United States’ businesses, Applicant’s 
connections to her family living in Nigeria (including her in-laws) create a potential 
conflict of interest because her relationship is sufficiently close to raise a security 
concern about her desire to assist relatives living in Nigeria or with Nigerian citizenship 
by providing sensitive or classified information.    
 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with 
her relatives who are citizens of Nigeria or live in Nigeria to raise the issue of potential 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply and further 
inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
 
4 An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a much heavier burden to overcome than an 
applicant with relatives living in Nigeria. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when 
parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR 
Case No. 07-12471 at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (listing numerous recent cases involving U.S. citizens with 
Iranian connections whose clearances were denied, and citing no recent cases where the Appeal Board 
affirmed the grant of a clearance for someone with immediate family members living in Iran). 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) partially applies; however, 8(c), 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply because 
the U.S. government has not encouraged her involvement with Nigerian citizens, her 
travel to Nigeria, or other Nigerian connections. Applicant has frequent contact with her 
parents, and her spouse has frequent contact with his parents, who are living in Nigeria. 
Additionally, Applicant has gone to Nigeria in 2003, 2005, and for three weeks in 2008. 
Her contacts with family members (including her in-laws) are sufficiently frequent to 
raise the possibility of her being forced to choose between the United States and the 
welfare of her relatives, who are citizens of Nigeria and/or living in Nigeria. She is not 
able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationships 
with her relatives who are Nigerian citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. There is no evidence that her relatives, who are Nigerian 
citizens and/or living in Nigeria are or have been political activist(s), challenging the 
policies of the Nigerian governments. Her father is an official in the Nigerian government 
and has held a Nigerian government position for almost thirty years. There is no 
evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Nigerian government or her father have 
approached or threatened Applicant or her Nigerian relatives for classified or sensitive 
information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that her Nigerian relatives or 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant herself would be targets for coercion or exploitation. While the government 
does not have any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record 
evidence was present, Applicant would have a very heavy evidentiary burden to 
overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns.   
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” She must establish that “[she] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant is a native-born, 
U.S. citizen. She received her post-secondary education in the United States. Her 
husband is a U.S. citizen, veteran of five years active duty service in the U.S. Marines, 
and 10-year security clearance holder. Applicant and her husband reside in the United 
States. Her siblings are U.S. residents. Her sister is a native-born U.S. citizen. Her 
parents intend to become permanent residents of the United States. She has a bank 
account in the United States, and does not own property or have a bank account in 
Nigeria. Her primary connections to Nigeria are her in-laws who live in Nigeria and her 
parents, who are Nigerian citizens living in Europe, as part of her father’s Nigerian 
government employment.  
  
AG ¶ 8(f) partially applies because Applicant has no interest in property or bank 
accounts in Nigeria. This mitigating condition can only mitigate AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to Nigeria are much less significant than her 
connections to Nigeria. Her connections to the United States taken together are 
sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
under Guidelines C and B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
A Guideline B and C decision concerning Nigeria must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation in Nigeria, as well as the dangers existing in Nigeria.5 While 
there is no evidence Nigeria is a known collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive 
economic information, Nigeria has very serious economic, military, political, judicial/legal 
and social problems. Nigeria and the United States are closely related. Nigeria is the 
most populous country in Africa and about one million Nigerians live in the United 
States. The United States is Nigeria’s largest trading partner.     
 
Applicant traveled to Nigeria in 2003 and 2005 using a Nigerian passport, and in 
2008 she went to Nigeria and stayed for three weeks with her in-laws, who are citizens 
and residents of Nigeria. She frequently communicates with her Nigerian parents, who 
are currently living in Europe. Her father is an official in the Nigerian government. Her 
ties to her father, mother, siblings, and in-laws are limited to telephone calls and visits. 
Her communications establish ties of affection to her Nigerian family members. Her 
husband frequently communicates to his parents who are Nigerian citizens and reside in 
Nigeria. There is some possibility that Applicant or her husband could be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States, especially because 
Nigeria has a significant lawless element, who may attempt to harm or pressure 
Applicant’s relatives to gain some kind of advantage over Applicant.  
 
The circumstances militating towards approval of a clearance are more 
significant. Applicant was born in the United States. She left Nigeria in 1999, just after 
graduating from a Malaysian high school. She has earned a bachelor’s degree at a U.S. 
university and is close to completing a master’s degree at a U.S. university. In February 
2008, she filed documentation so that her parents can become U.S. permanent 
residents. Her father plans to retire from Nigerian government service in about a year, 
and then her parents will be able to permanently move to the United States. Most 
importantly, her husband is a U.S. citizen and five-year active-duty veteran of the U.S. 
Marines. He has been a security clearance holder for ten years and the U.S. 
government trusts him with classified information. Her sister is a U.S. citizen, and both 
of her siblings are U.S. residents, who are attending post-secondary schools in the 
United States. She and her facility security officer documented the termination of her 
access to her Nigerian passport. Applicant provided seven character recommendations 
and an Individual Excellence Award from her employer. Her character references and 
work performance award evidence her dedication, responsibility, trustworthiness, 
professionalism, reliability, integrity, and active involvement in her community. Although 
the possibility of attempted exploitation of Applicant is relatively low, Applicant’s strong 
connections to the United States and especially to her U.S. family, community and 
employment establish “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
U.S., [she] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.”   
 
After weighing the evidence of her connections to Nigeria and to the United 
States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried her burden of 
mitigating the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”6 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
