                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08702 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 2, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 17, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 3, 
2009. The case was originally scheduled for March 3, 2009, but was continued. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on February 17, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
on March 10, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant did 
not object and they were admitted. The Government also offered a demonstrative 
exhibit that was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through E. Department Counsel did not object and they were admitted. 
The record was held open until March 19, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents, which he did. They were marked as AE F through H.1 Department Counsel 
had no objections and they were admitted and the record was closed. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He served in the Army on active duty for six years and 
in the Army Reserves for two years. He deployed to Bosnia twice and to Honduras. He 
was honorable discharge as an E-4. He has an associate’s degree in network systems 
technology. He has worked for a federal contractor as a security technician since 
November 2005. Applicant has been married since 2005. His wife has a medical 
condition that limits her ability to work. Applicant and his wife live with her parents and 
pay them rent.2  
 
Applicant admitted he was “neglectful” with his finances. He did not have the 
money to pay his bills. He has attempted to help his family by giving them money to pay 
their bills. Some of his delinquent debts he was aware of and others he did not know 
about. He understands that he owes money to creditors, but he needs to pay his daily 
expenses.3 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment ($3,344) for a debt for a store credit card. 
He believes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.t is the same debt because he had no other credit 
cards from the store. The debt became delinquent in approximately 2004. Applicant got 
the credit card for his wife’s parents. He is not sure what they purchased. He spoke to 
his mother-in-law about the debt, but they are unable to pay it also. Applicant has not 
paid the debt and his in-laws have not paid it.4  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a state tax lien ($950). Applicant believes that his 
previous employer was not withholding enough tax from his pay thereby causing the 
1 AE F consisted of awards, decorations and commendations Applicant received while on active 
duty, along with a copy of his honorable discharge papers. AE G and H are releases of tax liens. HE II is 
a copy of Department Counsel’s email stating he has no objections to the exhibits. 
 
2 Tr. 25-27; AE F. 
 
3 Tr. 23-25. 
 
4 Tr. 40-42, 68-73. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
debt. He stated he did not know he owed the money and believed it was for his 2004 
taxes. He filed his taxes on time, but did not have the money to pay them. Applicant 
provided a release of tax lien notice for 2005. It shows the amount paid as $949.89. The 
document is dated November 18, 2008.5 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a state tax lien ($1,048). Applicant believed that his 
employer was not withholding enough tax from his pay. He believes his wages were 
garnished to repay the debt. Applicant provided a release of tax line notice for 2003. It 
shows the amount paid as $1,084. The document is dated August 1, 2008.6 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is a credit card debt ($7,638). He used the credit card to 
help his girlfriend, now wife, with purchases and paying her bills. He has had no contact 
with the creditor in the past two years. He has not made any payments since 2003 and 
has no payment plan to resolve the debt.7 
 
The debts in SOR ¶ 1.e is for cell phone service ($1,177). Applicant believed the 
original debt was around $800 and he had the money to pay the debt, but gave it to his 
mother-in-law so she could pay her mortgage. He has not contacted the creditor to 
resolve the debt, but will try to pay it off.8  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.q are 
all medical debts. They total approximately $1,833. All are in collection and are for 
services provided to both Applicant and his wife. He believes some of the debts are 
copayments or for appointments that were missed. He stated he did not know he owed 
them at the time. He tried to talk to the creditors. Some of the debts were for emergency 
room visits, others he does not know what they were for. He has not paid or resolved 
any of these debts.9  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.r ($8,182) is for a vehicle that Applicant co-signed for his in-
laws. They defaulted on the loan in 2006 and it is in collection. The vehicle has not been 
repossessed, but rather his mother-in-law has been trying to contact the creditor to 
return the vehicle. They do not drive the vehicle. The debt is unresolved.10 
 
5 Tr. 42-44; AE G. 
 
6 Tr. 44-47; AE H. 
 
7 Tr. 53-55. 
 
8 Tr. 55-58. 
 
9 Tr. 58-64. 
 
10 Tr. 64-67. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.s ($175) is for cable television. Applicant disputes this debt. 
He believes he paid the bill, but has not contacted the creditor to dispute the debt. He 
did not provide documentation to show he paid it.11 
 
Applicant owes approximately $20,000 in student loans that are deferred. The 
deferment will expire in May 2009 and Applicant will be responsible for making 
payments. He estimated the monthly bill will be approximately $150.12  
 
Applicant has not paid his delinquent debts because he does not have the 
money. He is afraid to contact the creditors because he can not pay them. Applicant 
admitted he made mistakes with his finances. He has not had financial counseling. 13 
 
Applicant’s wife testified and stated he has attempted to pay his delinquent debts 
but the creditors wanted too much money. She acknowledged that three of the debts 
were incurred by her parents and they have not repaid Applicant. She believes 
Applicant would never jeopardize his country. He is honest and does not get in trouble. 
She hopes to get a job soon to help with the family finances.14 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law testified that Applicant is an outstanding person, who is 
dedicated to his job and always does the right thing. He has experienced some bumps 
in life and tries to make the right decision, but made some mistakes. Applicant has tried 
to help him out financially and he admitted he has not repaid Applicant. Applicant and 
his wife pay rent to live with their in-laws and they help out with some of the other 
expenses as needed.15  
 
Applicant also provided character letters from supervisors and coworkers. They 
consider Applicant to be honest, reliable, trustworthy, efficient, competent and 
courteous. He is a dedicated employee with a positive attitude.16 
 
Applicant does not have a budget. It appears his expenses exceed his income. 
His wife is looking for a job to help with the finances.17 Applicant’s delinquent debts are 
approximately $22,438. 
 
 
11 Tr. 67-68. 
 
12 Tr. 75-77. 
 
13 Tr. 82. 
 
14 Tr.84-94. 
 
15 Tr. 96-100. 
 
16 AE A. 
 
17 Tr. 29-40, 77-78. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and the applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and especially considered 
the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has many debts, some that have been delinquent for more than five 
years. He is afraid to contact the creditors because he does not have the money to pay 
them. I find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he has many delinquent debts that remain 
unpaid. He has not contacted many of his creditors or made nominal attempts to pay his 
creditors. His conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. 
I find (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not present evidence that his financial problems were the result of 
conditions beyond his control. He has given money to his in-laws for their bills and co-
signed on a vehicle that they then defaulted on. These actions were to the detriment of 
his financial responsibilities and within his control. His in-laws have not repaid him. I find 
mitigating condition (b) does not apply. Applicant has not received financial counseling 
and has not provided evidence of a good-faith effort to pay his creditors. He did satisfy 
his tax debts, but they were delinquent for years before they were satisfied. He has not 
provided evidence that the problem is being resolved or under control. I find mitigating 
conditions (c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputed he owed certain debts. However he has not contacted the 
creditors recently to resolve his disputes and failed to provide any documentation to 
support his disputes. Therefore, I find (e) does not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who has 
served his country honorably. He takes care of his wife and helps her family. Applicant 
has many delinquent debts with no plan or workable budget for resolving them. He may 
have legitimate disputes, but has not provided any evidence to substantiate his claims 
or taken any steps to dispute them. He has not contacted his creditors to resolve his 
delinquent debts, concerned that they will not be willing to work out plans with him. Nor 
has he been able to convince his in-laws to provide assistance in paying the debts that 
were incurred for their benefit. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.t:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly within the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
