                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08986 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On December 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 10, 2009. He later requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 17, 2009. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on March 10, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. The Government also submitted a 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
demonstrative exhibit that was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through I. Department Counsel did not object and they were 
admitted. The record remained open until March 19, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit 
additional evidence, which he did. They were marked as AE J though P. Department 
Counsel had no objections and they was admitted and the record closed. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 17, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1, e, 1. g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l and 1.n, 
of the SOR and denied the remaining allegations. The admissions are incorporated 
herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 42 years old and has worked for a federal contractor for 
approximately 17 months as a field service engineer. He is a divorced father of two 
children, ages 18 and 17. He has consistently paid child support and financially 
supports his children with additional funds as needed and when affordable.1  
 
Applicant worked for a federal agency as a contractor overseas from 1992 to 
2003. He started two businesses in 2003 to 2004. Both businesses were located in a 
recreational area with a man-made lake that was near a dam. The area catered to 
tourism. Both businesses made modest profits until a leak was found in the dam in 
2005, which required it to significantly lower its water level to prevent flooding. This 
reduced the recreational opportunities associated with the dam, which in turn affected 
tourism and all of the businesses in the area, including Applicant’s two stores. In 2006, 
the water level was reduced again, which had a devastating impact on Applicant’s 
stores and the surrounding businesses. Applicant paid the bills associated with the 
stores, such as those to suppliers, rent, utilities, and his employees, but was unable to 
keep up with other debts. During the later stage of the depressed economy he went 
from a gross monthly income of $9,000 to $1,500 in 30 days. By the end of 2005, 
Applicant took on a second job to help pay the bills. He was finally forced to close the 
stores in 2007. Applicant was unemployed for approximately six weeks before being 
hired at his present job 2007.2 
 
Applicant did not have health insurance for a period of time and he needed 
medical attention, which further impacted his financial situation.  
 
Applicant has been paying off his delinquent debts since becoming employed. He 
paid the remaining balance on his car in early 2008. He repaid a business and personal 
loan in February and May 2008. He also paid a credit card debt.3  
1 Tr. 35-37; AE K. 
 
2 Tr. 23-38, 46-47, 50. 
 
3 Tr. 24, 80; AE N. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant made a chart of his finances which lists his debts and a plan to pay off 
the remaining debts. He is systematically paying off his debts. His chart shows debts 
that he has already paid that were not included in the SOR. He is reluctant to agree to a 
payment plan with certain creditors due to the uncertainty of his present job and ability 
to pay his remaining debts. He does not want to start a plan that he cannot complete, so 
he is saving the remainder of his monthly income and will then tackle the debts he can 
pay. When he knows his job is secure he will readily enter payment plans.4  
 
Applicant had credit cards that originally had low balances, but when his 
businesses failed he was unable to make the minimum payments and the balances 
escalated.  
 
Applicant has two state tax liens and a civil judgment for state taxes owed. These 
tax debts are from his business for sales and use taxes. There was some confusion 
about the tax that was due in December 2004 and Applicant readily admitted he was 
late in paying the tax, which caused penalties and interest to be incurred. He was 
unaware of the additional amounts until six months after the infraction. He admitted he 
was late on other occasions and had difficulty paying the taxes. He stated the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c do not reflect the payments he made and the state will not 
remove the liens until all back taxes are paid. He asserted that the total amount he 
owes is $10,427. Applicant also received a $760 refund from the state which will be 
applied to his current debt.5 Applicant has no other tax debts.6 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,554) is a credit card debt that became delinquent in 
June 2007. The account was sold several times. Applicant contacted the current 
creditor, but Applicant could not comply with their repayment plan offer at this time.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,215) is a credit card debt that went delinquent in 
October 2007. Applicant contacted the creditor and the debt has been sold again. He 
has not contacted the current creditor.8 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($914) is a credit card debt. Applicant stated it is the same 
debt as in SOR ¶ 1.k. The balance is approximately $1,000. Applicant has a payment 
plan and has made three payments of $75.67. New monthly payments will be paid 
through an automatic withdrawal from Applicant’s bank.9 
4 Tr. 63; AE N.. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. 42-54; AE O. 
 
7 Tr. 54-56. 
 
8 Tr. 56-57. 
 
9 Tr. 38-41, 58, 65; AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($210) became delinquent in 2005. The original creditor 
was a jewelry store where he made a purchase in 2004 before his business problems. 
The creditor has since filed for bankruptcy and the debt was sold to a different creditor. 
Applicant has attempted to determine the current creditor without success.10  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($520) is a credit card debt. Applicant tried numerous 
times to determine the collection company. He attempted to pay the original creditor but 
they refused payment because the debt had been sold. He learned three days prior to 
the hearing there was yet another collection company. No further arrangements have 
been made.11  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($950) is a department store credit card. It has been 
delinquent since 2007 and no recent payments have been made. Applicant believes this 
is the same debt as in SOR ¶ 1.m because he only had one credit card with that store.12 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($702) is a store credit card debt that was incurred in 2006. 
Applicant paid $380 to the collection company to make the debt current, but then fell 
behind again. He has not made recent payments on the debt.13  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($1,307) is a store credit card debt. Applicant has not 
made payments on the debt.14 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($981) is for medical services when Applicant did not have 
health insurance. Applicant has arranged a payment plan to begin next week. He will 
pay $140 a month toward this debt. Another medical debt from the same creditor is 
included in this payment plan. The other debt is not alleged in the SOR.15 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.o is a medical debt that Applicant settled for $385. It was 
incurred for a hospital bill when Applicant did not have health insurance.16 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.p is a medical debt that Applicant incurred while he did not 
have health insurance. The debt is paid.17 
10 Tr. 58-61. 
 
11 Tr. 61-63. 
 
12 Tr. 64, 66-67. 
 
13 Tr. 64-65. 
 
14 Tr. 65-66. 
 
15 Tr. 67-68. 
 
16 Tr. 69-70; AE E. 
 
17 Tr. 70-71; GE 2 at p. 62.  
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Prior to Applicant’s business venture, he always paid his bills on time. He 
explained his failure to pay his debts was because he did not have the money. He was 
using what money he had to pay his business debts. He estimated that he will have all 
of his delinquent debts paid in approximately 18 months. If he stays employed, he will 
be deployed overseas and his income will increase, thereby accelerating his payment 
schedule. Applicant estimated he has $600 to $700 remaining at the end of each month 
after paying his expenses. He takes the remainder and either applies it toward a small 
debt to resolve it, or saves it so he has enough to resolve another debt after he has 
saved enough money. He maintains about $800 in savings for emergencies, such as 
auto repairs. Applicant recently received a raise from his employer which will help him 
resolve his debts.18 
 
Applicant’s supervisor provided a character letter on his behalf. He believes 
Applicant to be a valuable asset to the company. He has a superb work ethic and is 
dedicated to performing all of his assigned tasks.19  
 
A former supervisor attested to Applicant’s professional leadership ability, calm 
temperament when under pressure and ability to accept and complete any task given 
him with outstanding results. He exhibited a steadfast attitude and devotion to duty. He 
was considered a huge asset.20 
 
A fellow worker also provided a character letter. He believes Applicant is 
extremely cooperative with a desire to do quality work in a timely fashion.21 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
18 Tr. 63, 72-90; AE M and P.  
 
19 AE A. 
 
20 AE L. 
 
21 AE B. 
 
6 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
7 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has delinquent debts that began accruing in when his businesses start 
to fail in 2005 and, remain unpaid because of his failed businesses and loss of income. 
He is still resolving those debts. Therefore, I find both disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he has delinquent debts that remain 
unpaid. His conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I 
find (a) does not apply. In the past Applicant paid his bills on time. When he started two 
businesses that eventually failed due to the downturn in the tourist business he had 
difficulty paying his bills. He also needed medical services during a time he did not have 
health insurances. These were circumstances beyond his control. For (b) to fully apply 
he must have also acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant focused on 
paying his business debts and his employees. He took a second job to keep paying his 
bills. Unfortunately, he could not keep up with the debts. I find under the circumstances 
that he acted responsibly by ensuring his business creditors were paid, his employees 
were paid and paying off his small debts. Therefore, I find (b) applies. There is no 
evidence Applicant has received any financial counseling. Applicant has set up payment 
plans and is paying off some of his debts. He is only taking on those debts that he 
knows at this juncture he can reasonable pay, considering his job is in jeopardy. I find it 
 
8 
 
 
reasonable that he does not want to enter a payment plan if he knows he can not 
maintain it. Saving his money until he can pay off each debt, under the circumstances is 
reasonable. If he keeps his job he will enter into payment plans and attempt to 
accelerate his payments. I find Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors and there are indications the problems are being resolved. Hence I find (c) and 
(d) apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant consistently paid his bills 
in the past. He consistently pays his child support. He began having financial problems 
when, due to conditions beyond his control, the tourism declined and it affected the 
economy where his businesses were located. He did his best to pay his business 
creditors and employees, but unfortunately at the expense of his personal debts. 
Applicant has a systematic plan for paying all of his remaining debt. Although he has 
significant personal debt that is delinquent, he has not abandoned it. This is not a case 
of Applicant walking away from his debt. He realizes making an agreement to repay a 
creditor and then defaulting, if he loses his job, is not acting in good faith. He instead 
has chosen to pay what he can, and save money so he can reasonably resolve the 
remaining debts in the future. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant successfully mitigated the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly within the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
