KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The adverse impact on applicant of a decision is not relevant consideration in
determining clearance eligibility.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-07563.a1
DATE: 12/13/2011
DATE: December 13, 2011
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07563
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 5, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On September 29, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge James F.
Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On appeal, Applicant argues that if he does not receive a clearance, he will lose his job, and
probably not be able to find another one.  Such a circumstance would adversely impact not only him,
but also his sick mother who is dependent of him for her care.  Accordingly, Applicant asks that the
Appeal Board allow him to keep his clearance based on the totality of his situation.
The Appeal Board has previously noted that the adverse impact an unfavorable decision may
have on an applicant is not deemed a relevant consideration in evaluating his clearance eligibility.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03757 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2011).  Moreover, it does not review a
case de novo.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing
party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has not made an allegation of
harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a
security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean S. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
