 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-00802
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant has done virtually nothing to resolve his long-standing delinquent debts.
Clearance is denied.
On July 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on August 24, 2011. He
admitted all SOR allegations, except subparagraph 1.c, and he requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 28, 2011. A notice of hearing was
issued on October 12, 2011, scheduling the hearing for October 25, 2011. Applicant failed
to appear for the hearing, but he contacted department counsel and stated he had
automobile problems and was unable to arrange for other transportation. A second notice
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
of hearing was issued on November 8, 2011, rescheduling the hearing for December 5,
2011. The hearing was conducted as rescheduled. The Government submitted four
documents that were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4 and admitted into the
record without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any documentary evidence.
The transcript was received on December 13, 2011.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is 50 years old. He has been employed as a manufacturing technician by
a defense contractor since May 2007. He graduated from high school in June 1979.
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in August 1986, and he served continuously on active
duty until he retired in August 2006. Applicant was a petty officer first class when he retired.
He possessed a security clearance, including at the top secret level, for most of his time
in the Navy and no prior adverse action was ever taken to revoke or downgrade that
clearance. 
Applicant was first married in April 1987. He and his first wife separated in 2004, and
they obtained a divorce in or about September 2006. Applicant has been remarried since
September 2006. He does not have any children.  
Applicant’s April 2011 credit report discloses a delinquent account, owed in the
amount of $34,369, that has been submitted for collection. Applicant attributes this debt
to a personal loan he obtained when he and his first wife separated so he could pay for two
households and “rejuvenate being a bachelor. . . .” (Tr. 27) He admits he was irresponsible
in obtaining the loan. This debt is unpaid.
Applicant’s April 2011 credit report discloses another delinquent account, owed in
the amount of $123, that has been submitted for collection. Applicant attributes this debt
to contact lenses his wife purchased several years ago. He was questioned about this debt
in December 2009, at which time he admitted he had received collection letters from the
creditor and stated he would pay the debt. He has not made any payment on this account.
Applicant claims to not recognize the collection account listed in his April 2001 credit
report owed in the amount of $637. He acknowledged he became aware of this alleged
delinquent account when he received correspondence from the Government. However, he
has done nothing to investigate the origin of the account because he does not have the
funds to satisfy the account if it is determined to belong to him.
Applicant acknowledges he is responsible for the collection account, owed in the
amount of $859, listed in his October 2009 credit report. This account arose from cell
phone service he discontinued in 2007. He has not made any payment on this account. 
Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s credit reports disclose a credit union
credit card owed in the amount of $12,464. Applicant testified this account is delinquent,
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.6
3
but he thought he only owed about $6,000. He claims he has made a few unsuccessful
attempts to bring the account current.
Applicant contracted with a consumer law group in 2009 in an effort to resolve his
delinquent accounts. He made several payments to the group before he determined it
would not actually help him satisfy his delinquent debts. He terminated the service in 2010,
and he has not made any further arrangements to satisfy any of his delinquent creditors.
In addition to the irresponsible decision he made in obtaining the personal loan in
2004, Applicant attributes his continuing financial problems to his wife’s alcohol problem.
He testified she is currently on probation for assaulting him and two driving-under-the-
influence charges and he is making court-ordered monthly payments of $345 as a result
of those convictions. Applicant’s only plan to resolve his delinquent debt is to apply per
diem he expects to receive when his employer assigns him to work in another state.  
       
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F (financial
considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case.
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of5
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant6
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id. at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant has four delinquent accounts, owed in the combined amount of $35,988,
that have been submitted for collection. Those accounts date back as far as 2004, and
Applicant has failed to take any meaningful step to resolve any of these accounts.
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and DC 19(c):
a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
Applicant’s financial problems are continuing. His largest delinquent debt resulted
from his admitted irresponsible decision in obtaining a personal loan which he obviously
has been unable to repay. The smallest debt listed in the SOR, owed in the amount of
$123, is for contact lenses his wife purchased. In December 2009, Applicant admitted he
had received collection letters from this creditor and stated he would pay the debt. Two
years have passed and he has not made any payment on the account. 
Applicant contracted with a consumer law group in 2009 in an unsuccessful effort
to resolve his delinquent debts. However, he terminated that contract in 2010, and he has
done nothing since to resolve any of his delinquent debts. While it is not alleged in the
SOR, Applicant’s delinquent credit union credit card debt, owed in the amount of $12,464,
discloses that he continues to live beyond his means. 
5
Applicant attributes his wife’s alcohol problems and the probation expenses he has
acquired as a result of her numerous convictions as the cause of his inability to resolve his
delinquent debt. However, there is nothing in the record to indicate those problems are
being resolved or that they will not cause Applicant further financial distress in the future.
Finally, Applicant’s only plan to begin to satisfy his delinquent debts, i.e., applying per diem
he may receive if assigned to work in a different state, is speculative and, based upon
Applicant’s track record of not dealing with his delinquent debts, unlikely to occur even if
he does receive those payments.    
I have considered the following Mitigating Conditions (MC) and conclude they do not
apply: MC 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; MC 20(c): the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control; MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and MC 20(e): the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the
dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. The remaining mitigating
conditions have no applicability to the facts of this case. 
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the
financial considerations security concern. He has not overcome the case against him nor
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-d: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

