                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07509 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. She has 
accumulated over $40,000 in delinquent debt and failed to establish that she manages 
her finances in a responsible manner. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made 
a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The 
basis for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges the 
security concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant responded to 
the SOR on August 29, 2011 (Answer). She admitted 10 of the debts alleged in the 
SOR and and requested a decision on the administrative record. 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On September 8, 2011, Department Counsel submitted its File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) and forwarded it to Applicant the following day. The FORM contains 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which are hereby admitted. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the FORM on September 21, 2011. She had 30 days within 
which to file a response to the FORM. She did not submit a response. I was assigned 
the case on November 18, 2011. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 The Government, pursuant to Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.17, moved to amend 
the SOR to conform to the evidence. Specifically, the Government moves to amend the 
SOR by: (a) changing the creditor alleged in ¶ 1.e (replace “Security Credit”, with “a 
creditor identified as a medical account . . . on your credit report dated June 2, 2011”), 
and (b) withdrawing ¶¶ 1.g, 1.s, and 1.y. The amendment is granted. Applicant was 
provided notice of the requested changes and the amendment does not prejudice her.2  
 
 The SOR now alleges 22 debts totaling $41,308. Applicant’s previous denial to 
the original debt alleged in ¶ 1.e remains in full effect. The Government bears the 
burden as to this debt and the other SOR allegations denied by Applicant.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. She graduated high school in 1989 and that same year 
married her late husband, who was 44 years her elder. She has an adult child and has 
resided at the same address since 1989.4  
 
Applicant was granted a security clearance in 1999. She has held a job from 
1999 to the present, without any periods of unemployment or underemployment. She 
has primarily worked as a custodian. She has been with her current employer, a 
government contractor, since June 2010. She previously worked for this same employer 
from 1999 to 2002.5 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 10-08560 at n. 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 5, 2011) (EO 10865 and the Directive 
provide “that an applicant is entitled to a written statement of reasons for denial of a clearance, 
opportunity to reply in writing, and an opportunity to appear personally before a Department Official” or 
have the matter decided on the administrative record. The Amendment in this case was fully consistent 
with the due process requirements of the EO and the Directive). See also ISCR Case No. 04-08547 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 30, 2007) (Amendments should be liberally granted as long as “fair notice to the affected party 
and the affected party has a reasonable opportunity to respond”). 
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“The Government is 
required to present substantial evidence of those allegations in the SOR that are controverted. That is, 
the Government’s burden extends only to those SOR allegations which the applicant has denied.”). 
 
4 GE 4. 
 
5 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant submitted her current security clearance application on June 21, 2010. 
She disclosed three delinquent debts: a loan from a check cashing place, a credit card, 
and a deficiency owed for her car that had been repossessed. She estimated the total 
amount past due on these three accounts was about $4,634.6 A credit report that was 
generated a few days later, as part of Applicants background investigation, revealed 20 
accounts in Applicant’s name that were in collection status for more than $20,000.7 
Applicant discussed her delinquent debts with a Government investigator in July 2010. 
She disclosed to the investigator that she was 60-days late on her mortgage, but had no 
knowledge regarding the majority of the delinquent debts on her credit report. She 
promised to look into the debts and satisfy those that were her debts.8  
 
 The amended SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts totaling about $41,308.9 
Applicant admits 10 of these debts or about $23,662 of the total amount allegedly past 
due.10 She promises to resolve these 10 debts in her Answer. As for the 12 debts she 
denies, Applicant states that she either does not recall the debt or was unable to pay 
the debt due to economic hardship.11 She promises to find out about these debts and 
take care of them. All 22 delinquent debts are listed on Applicant’s credit reports,12 and 
she discussed some of these debts with the investigator in July 2010.13 
 
 Applicant did not submit proof of payment on any of her delinquent debts. She 
also did not submit proof that she has contacted her overdue creditors in order to 
resolve her debts, or that she has disputed these debts with the creditor directly or 
through the credit reporting agencies. She also did not submit proof of having taken a 
financial counseling course, nor did she provide any information regarding any matters 
outside of her control that affected her ability to pay her debts. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
6 Id. at 39-43. 
 
7 GE 6. 
 
8 GE 5. 
 
9 Nine of these debts, totaling $1,468, are for delinquent medical bills. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 
1.h, 1.j, 1.u -1.w). 
 
10 SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k – 1.m, 1.q, 1.t, and 1.x. 
 
11 GE 3. 
 
12 GE 6 and 7. See also FORM at 8 (chart). 
 
13 Compare GE 5 with SOR. See also FORM at 8. 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $40,000 in bad 
debt directly implicates this concern. It also establishes the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”14 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant currently has a significant 
amount of delinquent debt, which she has not satisfied and there was no evidence 
14 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
presented that she has attempted to resolve her past-due accounts.15 Even if I were to 
assume that some of Applicant’s debts are related to medical issues and the passing of 
her husband, she failed to provide any evidence to support a finding that she has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.16 Applicant bears the burden of presenting 
evidence in mitigation and extenuation,17 but she failed to present any evidence – even 
as to the 10 debts totaling over $23,000 that she admits owing.18 The mere promise to 
resolve her debts in the future, especially in light of her previous unfilled promise to the 
investigator to resolve some of the very same debts alleged in he SOR, is not enough to 
mitigate the concern at issue.19 Applicant failed to establish that her financial problem is 
under control and that she now manages her finances in a responsible manner. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through (e) do not apply. Applicant’s financial problem remains a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).20 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant has worked her entire adult life and previously held a 
security clearance without issue. However, she did not provide any documentation to 
place in context her financial problems and potentially mitigate the security concern 
raised by the significant amount of debt that she has amassed. The favorable whole-
person factors present in this case do not outweigh the security concern at issue. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
15 ISCR Case 09-07792 at 2 (App. Bd. May 10, 2011) (“. . . evidence that Applicant’s debts 
remained delinquent at the close of the record supports . . . conclusion that these debts were ongoing.”) 
 
16 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) (“the second prong of MC 
20(b) requires that an applicant act responsibly under the circumstances”). 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at 3 (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions and/or the Government’s 
evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant to mitigate the 
concern.”). 
 
18 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present 
documentation to substantiate his or her claim about the debts at issue). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999) (“Promises to take actions in the future, 
however sincere, are not a substitute for a documented track record of remedial actions.”) 
 
20 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the original SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:              Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:          Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.r:              Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.s:          Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.t – 1.x:              Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.y:          Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
