 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 10-08425 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on September 9, 2011. She requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. I was assigned to the case on October 18, 
2011. A notice of hearing was issued on October 31, 2011, setting the hearing for 
November 17, 2011. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without any objection. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through K that were admitted into evidence without 
any objections. The record was left open for submission of additional evidence. 
Applicant timely submitted AE L through S that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel’s transmittal letter related to the post-hearing 
submission was marked as HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 29, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR lists nine delinquent debts totaling about $190,225. Applicant admitted 
she owed the delinquent debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.i, but 
denied the rest of the listed debts. She also denied deliberately falsifying her financial 
information in her public trust position application. The admissions are incorporated into 
the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. She is divorced with no children. She currently works 
as a compliance officer for a defense contractor. She holds a Juris Doctorate (JD) 
degree, although at the time of the hearing her license to practice law was suspended 
for nonpayment of her state bar dues. She has no prior military experience and has not 
previously held a position of trust.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) being delinquent on  several 
small consumer debts, various credit card debts, a second mortgage loan of over 
$95,000 acquired during her marriage, and a delinquent student loan debt for over 
$81,000. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.i); and (2) making false statements in response to her public 
trust position application questions in April 2009 concerning her financial record (SOR ¶ 
2.a). The debts are reflected in credit reports dated April 17, 2010, and January 3, 
2011.2  
  
 In 2009, Applicant experienced several events that negatively impacted her 
financial condition. At that time, she was practicing law for a law firm, specializing in real 
estate law. She was not a partner, but a senior employee and was making about 
$170,000 annually. Because of the general decline in business and the recession, she 
was laid off by the law firm in August 2009. She was given three months’ severance 
pay. Earlier that year, her mother was diagnosed with cancer and she was one of two 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-5; GE 1; AE L. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-29; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
primary caregivers for her mother. Applicant spent much of her time caring for her 
mother. Her mother passed away in September 2009. Applicant had to pay for half of 
her funeral expenses. She was sporadically employed from her layoff until she was 
hired by her current employer in March 2010.3 
 
 Applicant was married in 2003. During the course of their marriage, her husband 
was responsible for the family finances. Applicant admitted that she knew very little 
about their financial dealings. In March 2009, Applicant discovered her husband was 
having an affair. She proceeded with a divorce action. It was only during the divorce 
action that she discovered the full extent of her financial problems. They had to sell their 
primary residence through a short sale. The SOR debt listed at ¶ 1.f is a second 
mortgage on this property that was not released through the short sale. Her divorce was 
final in March 2010. She received alimony in the amount of $1,000 per month from her 
husband, but because of some required payments the net monthly amount she received 
was about $650. The alimony payments stopped in April 2011. She also received a split 
of an investment account from the marital estate of about $55,000. Because of 
investment complications, she only recently received this money. She also received 
about $80,000 from two retirement fund accounts she had with law firms that she used 
to help pay expenses during her unemployment. These amounts were subject to IRS 
early withdrawal penalties that affected the total amount she actually received.4  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c are consumer debts accrued by 
Applicant during her separation. They were all paid on December 15, 2011, by cashier’s 
check.5  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are credit card debts accrued by 
Applicant during her marriage. Settlement amounts were paid on December 15, 2011, 
by cashier’s check and a credit card payment.6  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is the second mortgage owed by Applicant. She 
entered into a stipulated judgment with the lender. She and her ex-husband are jointly 
and severally liable on the debt of $95,996. They also agreed with the lender to a 
settlement payment whereby Applicant would pay $200 monthly toward the judgment 
amount. She has made those payments since September 2010 directly from her bank 
account. She is current on those payments.7  
 
                                                          
3 GE 4-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 49-50, 62, 64; GE 2-3. 
 
5 Tr. at 36; AE P. 
 
6 Tr. at 36, 38; AE Q-R. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-32; GE 2; AE E. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a credit card accrued by Applicant during her 
marriage for which she is responsible. She will be reimbursed by her ex-husband once 
she pays the debt. She is working with the creditor to settle this debt. It is currently 
unresolved.8  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is student loan debt owed by Applicant. She is 
currently in a default status on her student loans, but has been making monthly 
payments of $710 since April 2011. At her current payment rate, she will have her loans 
out of “default” status by December 2011. Once out of this status, she will be able to 
negotiate new monthly payment amounts.9 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a personal loan accrued by Applicant after her 
divorce for which she is responsible. She is working with the creditor to settle this debt. 
It is currently unresolved.10 
 
 Applicant’s testified that she is moving in with her boyfriend to minimize monthly 
expenses and that she is currently meeting all of her monthly financial obligations in a 
timely manner. She recently attended a financial counseling course. She was also 
reinstated in good standing with her state bar association.11 
 
 On April 9, 2010, Applicant completed her public trust position application. She 
answered “yes” to the question asking if she was now 180 days delinquent on any loan. 
She listed one loan, but did not list the other debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
credibly testified that she relied on a credit report that indicated only one debt delinquent 
past 180 days at the time she filled out the application. She did not remember the date 
of that credit report. She also knew that a credit report would be used by the 
government during her background investigation. She had no intention to deceive the 
government about her finances. She knew she had debts, but just answered the 
question asked (debts over 180 days delinquent) based upon the information she had at 
the time. Her testimony is corroborated by the information contained in GE 4, an April 
17, 2010, credit report that does not show any account past due by 180 days except for 
the account she listed on her application.12   
   
 Applicant presented character letters in support of her integrity and professional 
standards. In the forefront were her volunteer efforts for the local search and rescue 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 36; AE L. 
 
9 Tr. at 33-34; AE C-D. 
 
10 Tr. at 36. 
 
11 Tr. at 71; AE N, S. 
 
12 Tr. at 84-85; GE 4. 
 
 
5 
 
 
activities. She was recognized in 2005 as the woman of the year in that area. Members 
of the local law enforcement community were very supportive of Applicant.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness determination, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 46; AE A, B, M. 
 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay her debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individuals current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties were caused by a confluence of circumstances 
that included her job layoff, the illness and subsequent death of her mother, and the 
breakup of her marriage. While the debts are recent, they occurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Additionally, Applicant presented sufficient 
evidence to establish her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies.  
All the circumstances referred to above (job layoff, death of mother, divorce), 
were circumstances beyond Applicant’s control. She acted responsibly when she 
sought employment outside the legal career field and used her retirement funds to begin 
paying off her accounts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
Applicant has either paid or set up payment plans for all but two of the delinquent 
accounts. Most importantly, the two largest balance accounts have been addressed. 
The remaining two unresolved accounts are in settlement discussions and she has 
shown positive efforts towards resolving these as well. She has also recently received 
financial counseling. Both AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. 
Applicant did not deliberately provide false information about her financial 
condition on her public trust position application. At the time Applicant filled out her 
application, she listed the one debt that the question addressed (debts over 180 days 
old). Her testimony is supported by the information contained in GE 4, which only shows 
one debt in excess of 180 days. She listed this debt on her application. The 
Government did not meet its burden to establish deliberate falsification. AG ¶¶ 16(a) 
does not apply.  
 
8 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a sensitive position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position 
of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s outstanding 
service to her community. I also considered the circumstances by which she fell behind 
in her finances and the efforts she has made to recover since then. Applicant’s evidence 
is sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns in this case.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct,  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
