KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered limited purposes such as
credibility and evaluation of the case in mitigation. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-08560.a1
DATE: 12/05/2011
DATE: December 5, 2011
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-08560
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Terry L. Elling, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 25, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On September 9, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W.
Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his credibility
determination; whether the Judge denied Applicant due process; whether the Judge erred in his
application of the mitigating conditions; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was
erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is employed by a Defense
contractor.  Married with two minor children, he has a bachelor’s degree.
Applicant enjoyed a large income in the early 2000s.  However, he lost his job due to a
reorganization of the company, and his new one was not so remunerative.  He experienced
unemployment before he was hired by his current employer.  In addition, he has a child who requires
extensive medical treatment, along with modifications to the family home.  Applicant was unable
to pay his bills, and they became delinquent.  
In the mid-2000s, Applicant incorporated a side business for the purposes of buying and
selling real estate, although the company never actually bought any.  Applicant guaranteed some of
the business’s debts, and these were among his delinquencies.  
Applicant retained a law firm to assist him in resolving his financial problems, but the firm
did not pay any creditors.  Applicant terminated his relationship with the firm.  He did settle several
of his delinquent debts and restructured the mortgages on his house.  
The SOR alleged two debts, one for $9,998 and another for $16,702.  Applicant claimed that
he had a payment plan for the first one and that he had settled the second.  However, he did not
provide documentary corroboration for these claims, and, during the course of his security clearance
investigation, he made inconsistent statements about the debts.   
Applicant is currently living within his means and is not accumulating any additional
delinquent debt.  His wife has a part-time job.  Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for his job
performance, trustworthiness, responsibility, and honesty.
In the Analysis, the Judge noted that Applicant had resolved several of his debts.  He also
cited to Applicant’s evidence of good character.  However, the Judge stated that Applicant failed
to provide documentation to support his claims of a repayment plan for one of the alleged debts and
1Applicant presented evidence of a check in the amount of $750, which he claimed had been paid toward one
of the SOR debts.  However, the Judge concluded that this check actually pertained to another, non-alleged, debt.  The
evidence supports this conclusion by the Judge.  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
3Executive Order 10865 is included in the Directive as Enclosure 1.  It provides, at Section 3, that an applicant
is entitled to a written statement of reasons for denial of a clearance, opportunity to reply in writing, and an opportunity
to appear personally before a Department Official.  In preparing for such an appearance, an applicant is entitled to a
reasonable time to prepare, to be represented by counsel, to cross examine witnesses, and to a written decision.  The
Directive provides that a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge satisfies the provision  for a personal appearance.
Directive ¶ E3.1.8.  
4The Judge found that Applicant’s discussion of this debt, for example in his answers to interrogatories and in
his clearance interview, did not agree as to the amount he was supposed to pay each month, as well as to the length of
time during which he claimed to have been making payments.  Decision at 3.  Government Exhibit (GE) 4, Personal
Subject Interview, conducted in March and June 2010, and Answers to Interrogatories, signed March 9, 2011, support
the Judge’s finding.    
5The Judge found that Applicant, in his answers to interrogatories, stated that he did not recognize the acronym
of the alleged debtor.  He told the security clearance interviewer that he owed $20,000 on this debt, but, during a re-
interview three months later, he stated that the debt was paid off.  Applicant testified that he could not explain this
discrepancy, except that the day of the interview was a long one.  GE 4 and Tr. at 57 support the Judge’s finding.     
3
settlement of the other.1  Additionally, the Judge noted Applicant’s inconsistent statements and his
failure to provide an explanation for them.  The Judge stated that the record left him with
“significant unanswered questions” about the extent to which Applicant’s finances are under control.
“Under AG ¶ 2(b),2 I am required to resolve my doubt in favor of national security.”  Decision at
10. 
On appeal, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his assessment of Applicant’s
credibility.  He argues that he has never “misled or knowingly misstated any of the facts and
circumstances surrounding his financial circumstances.”  He also asserts, in a footnote, that, by
considering Applicant’s inconsistent statements, the Judge was raising Guideline E security concerns
without giving him appropriate notice and an opportunity to respond, as required by the Executive
Order and the Directive.3  Applicant Brief at 6.   
We defer to a Judge’s credibility determination, unless it is not supported by the record
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0007 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Nov. 28, 2000).  We have examined
the Judge’s treatment of inconsistencies in Applicant’s accounts of his debts.  The Judge’s comments
are supported by the record.  Applicant made inconsistent statements concerning important aspects
of the repayment plan pertaining to the $9,998 debt.4  His presentation concerning the other debt
likewise contained inconsistencies.5  Applicant’s brief, viewed in light of the record, provides no
reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility determination.
4
Concerning the due process argument, conduct not alleged in a SOR may be considered for
certain limited purposes, such as a credibility determination and evaluating an applicant’s case for
mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06859 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 20, 2010).  In the case under
consideration here, the Judge addressed Applicant’s inconsistencies as they bore on Applicant’s
credibility and on whether he had met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation under Guideline F.
The Judge considered the inconsistent statements in their proper context. He did not deny Applicant
the due process rights afforded by the Directive.
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
