1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-04413
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern generated by her delinquent
finances. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On July 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an
SOR to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial
considerations.The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense (DoD) on December 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2011, denying paragraphs 1.a through
1.l, 1.n, and  1.p through 1.s. She admitted the remainder.  
2
 Applicant requested a determination based on the written record rather than a
hearing. On October 11, 2011, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant
Materials (FORM) setting forth the Government’s  case. Applicant received the FORM
on October 26, 2011 and was given 30 days to file a response. On November 9, 2011,
she submitted a six-page response. Department Counsel did not object to the inclusion
of the response into the record, and on November 29, 2011, the case was assigned to
me. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29-year-old single woman with three children, ages ten, nine, and
seven. Applicant got married in 2002. She and  her husband separated in May 2005,
and divorced in 2007. 
Applicant, a high school graduate, has been working as an administrative
specialist and receptionist for a defense contractor since September 2009. (Item 6 at
16) Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to her supervisor, she “is a
highly results oriented worker who strives for perfection,” and demonstrates “sound
judgment” in executing her tasks. (Item 7 at 117) According to a coworker, “the impact
of [Applicant’s] support ripples through the team.” (Item 7 at 128) 
In June 2004, Applicant lost her job, and was then unemployed for five months.
Consequently, she began to fall behind on her finances. In November 2004, Applicant
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. In February 2005, the bankruptcy court
discharged approximately $25,000 of Applicant’s debt. (Item 7 at 135)
 The SOR alleges that Applicant accrued approximately $36,900 of additional
delinquent debt since the bankruptcy discharge. The SOR includes medical bills
(subparagraphs 1.a-1.k, 1.n, 1.t, and 1.u), utilities (subparagraphs 1.l, 1.m, and 1.o), a
judgment (SOR subparagraph 1.q), the deficiency from a repossessed car (SOR
subparagraph 1.p), and one miscellaneous debt (subparagraph 1.s).
Applicant contacted the credit reporting bureaus to dispute the medical bills listed
in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k, totalling $14,720, arguing that they were the
responsibility of her insurance carrier. Subsequently, these debts were deleted from her
credit reports. (Item 4 at 26) 
Applicant contends that subparagraphs 1.n and 1.t are covered by her health
insurance, and that 1.u is a duplicate of 1.t.  She reported her dispute of subparagraph
1.n to the credit reporting agency. (Item 4 at 12) The resolution of this dispute is
pending. Applicant provided no documentary evidence supporting her dispute of this
debt. Similarly, Applicant provided no documentary evidence supporting her dispute of
subparagraph 1.t or establishing that 1.t and 1.u, which have different account numbers,
are the same debt.
3
As for the allegedly delinquent utilities, Applicant disputes subparagraph 1.l, but
provided no evidence supporting her dispute. She admits subparagraphs 1.m and 1.o,
but contends she will not have the disposable income to pay them until she finishes
satisfying a $6,000 debt owed to a bail bondsman stemming from an August 2010
arrest. (Item 11)
The debt listed in subparagraph 1.p is an auto loan for a car Applicant purchased
in March 2005. She stopped making payments in August 2006, and it was repossessed
in April 2008. (Item 4 at 15) The amount outstanding is approximately $16,000. She is
currently attempting to reach a settlement with the creditor, but acknowledges that her
ability to satisfy this debt is limited by the debt she is satisfying that is owed to the bail
bondsman. (Item 4 at 6)
The judgment, as listed in subparagraph 1.q, totals $2,616. It stems from a
lawsuit that Applicant’s then father-in-law filed against her in January 2006 to recover
the costs of her wedding to his son. (Item 10) Applicant contends she satisfied this
judgment through a wage garnishment. She provided evidence that, in June 2008, she
made $500 in payments. (Item 7 at 5; Item 10) She provided no additional evidence of
more payments, or proof that she has satisfied the judgment.
Applicant denies subparagraph 1.s, totalling $577. She contends she has
formally denied it with the creditor, but did not provide any documentary evidence.
In the spring of 2008, Applicant experienced a miscarriage. Shortly afterwards,
she experienced related health problems that caused her to miss a lot of time on the
job. Consequently, in May 2008, her employer fired her. (Item 6 at 19,31) By the time a
temp agency hired her in August 2008, her financial situation was so poor that she was
living in a homeless shelter. (Item 6 at 12)
In September 2010, Applicant enrolled in credit counseling. (Item 7 at 105-112)
She withdrew from the credit counseling agency after it began having financial
problems. (Response to FORM at 4)
Since May 2011, Applicant has been maintaining a budget. According to the
budget, she has approximately $800 of after-expense monthly income. (Item 7 at 135)
The budget includes none of the SOR debts nor the $400 monthly debt she is paying to
the bail bondsman. (Item 4 at 6, 9)
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
4
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline H, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information (AG
¶ 18). Applicant’s financial struggles trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
5
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant successfully disputed subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k. Therefore, AG ¶
20(e) applies, and  I resolve these subparagraphs in her favor.
Applicant provided no evidence supporting her dispute of subparagraphs 1.l, 1.t,
and 1.u. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable to these debts.
Marital problems, job instability, and health problems contributed to Applicant’s
financial struggles. She retained a credit counselor and has contacted the credit
reporting agencies, informing them of several of her delinquencies. Conversely, she
provided no evidence of seeking another credit counselor since firing the original one in
May 2011, and she acknowledges that she cannot make any payments toward the
satisfaction of the remaining SOR delinquencies until she finishes paying the debt owed
to a bail bondsman. Consequently, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply, but
none of the other mitigating conditions apply because of the amount of delinquent debt
outstanding and Applicant’s lack of any plan to resolve it.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative jutdge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant is an industrious employee who is well respected both by coworkers
and superiors. Many of her financial problems were caused by domestic strife stemming
from a separation and subsequent divorce, in addition to health problems, and
employment instability. However, more than $20,000 of delinquent debt remains
unresolved and Applicant has no tangible plan to repay it. These issues, in addition to
the recurrent nature of Applicant’s financial problems render Applicant an unaceptable
candidate for a security clearance. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.l - 1.v: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
