 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09936 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to another judge. Because of 
a scheduling conflict, the case was assigned to me on October 12, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on October 19, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled 
 
2 
 
on October 24, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A though J at the hearing. 
Applicant’s exhibit list is marked as HE II The exhibits were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was held open until November 30, 2011, for Applicant to 
submit additional evidence. He submitted one document (AE K) that was admitted into 
the record without objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum is marked 
as HE III and Applicant’s counsel’s email is marked as HE IV. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 28, 2011. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 During the course of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR 
to withdraw various allegations under Guideline F. Specifically, she moved to withdraw 
SOR ¶¶ 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t because they are duplicative of other allegations. I granted the 
motion; however, to insure clarity of the results, I will also enter findings in favor of the 
Applicant on those allegations. Additionally, Applicant and counsel waived the 15-day 
notice requirement in order to have this case heard while Applicant was back from an 
overseas work assignment. Counsel and Applicant readily agreed to the hearing date.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted some of the SOR factual allegations and denied others. The 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, 
testimony and admitted exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is single and has 
one minor child. He has custody of his child because the mother is incarcerated. He has 
some taken college courses. He began working for his current defense contractor 
employer two years ago. He recently deployed overseas for his company. He was 
honorably discharged from the Air Force after serving from 2001 to 2005. He held a 
security clearance while in the Air Force.2  
 
 The SOR alleged 18 delinquent debts totaling approximately $38,242. The debts 
were listed on credit reports obtained on July 1, 2010 and February 3, 2011.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began after he left the Air Force in 2005. He was 
unemployed for about 10 months before he found his first job. He received about $600 a 
month in unemployment benefits during this time. He obtained a job at a retail company 
on a part-time basis earning about nine dollars per hour. He later obtained another retail 
job paying about one dollar an hour more. From 2005 to 2008, he was living with the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 9-12. 
 
2 Tr. at 26-27, 85; GE 1; AE K. 
 
3 GE 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
woman (W) who is his child’s mother. This relationship deteriorated because W started 
using drugs. Despite this, Applicant claims that he trusted W to pay his bills and other 
expenses with money he was earning. He claims to have given her approximately 
$10,000 to pay various bills over an extended time period. He later realized that the bills 
were not paid when he was evicted from his apartment for nonpayment. He no longer 
associates with W and provides all the financial support for their child. Since he 
obtained his current job, he has been working to pay off his delinquent obligations. His 
current salary is about $80,000 per year and he has about $3,400 per month in 
disposable income at the end of each month.4 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a delinquent phone provider debt for $414. 
Applicant claims he paid this debt, but provided no documentation to support payment.5  
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d are delinquent medical debts. He 
provided documentation showing payment of these debts.6   
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a collection for an unexpired lease for which he 
was responsible in the amount of $5,724. He disputes the amount of delinquency (no 
proof to support the dispute), but acknowledges the debt. This debt remains 
unresolved.7 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a delinquent school loan debt for $7,845. He 
claims this debt was paid, but provided no documentation showing payment.8 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a collection for an unexpired lease for which he 
was responsible in the amount of $1,303. He claims he paid this debt over the 
telephone through an electronic transfer from his bank account. To support this claim, 
he supplied a voided front-side of a check to this creditor in the amount of $850. The 
check was unsigned and did not show any endorsements. He did not provide any 
documentation showing the amount was deducted from his bank account.9   
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a delinquent cable debt in the amount of $641. 
He claims to have paid this debt, but provided no documentation to support payment.10 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27, 31-32, 49-54; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-47; GE 2-3; AE C-E, J. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Id. 
 
9 Id. 
 
10 Id. 
 
 
4 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a delinquent school loan debt in the amount of 
$8,304. He claims he is making payments on this debt, but he also provided 
documentation showing this debt remains in a delinquent status.11 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is a delinquent phone provider debt in the amount 
of $113. He claims this debt was paid when he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a to the same 
phone provider. However, he did not provide documentation of payment on either 
debt.12 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a delinquent school loan debt in the amount of 
$1,519. He provided documentation showing payment of this debt on October 18, 2010, 
by electronic transfer from his bank account.13   
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l is a delinquent consumer account in the amount of 
$734. He claims he paid this debt over the telephone through an electronic transfer from 
his bank account. To support this claim, he supplied a voided front-side of a check to 
this creditor in the amount of $551. The check was unsigned and did not show any 
endorsements. He did not provide any documentation showing the amount was 
deducted from his bank account.14 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is a delinquent consumer account in the amount 
of $271. He claims he paid this debt over the telephone through an electronic transfer 
from his bank account. To support this claim, he supplied a voided front-side of a check 
to this creditor in the amount of $104. The check was unsigned and did not show any 
endorsements. He did not provide any documentation showing the amount was 
deducted from his bank account.15 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n is a delinquent consumer account in the amount 
of $5,593. He claims this debt is paid, but provided no documentation showing 
payment.16 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o is a collection for an unexpired lease for which he 
was responsible in the amount of $4,216. He disputes the amount of delinquency (no 
proof to support the dispute), but acknowledges the debt. This debt remains 
unresolved.17   
                                                          
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id. 
 
17 Id. 
 
 
5 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p is a delinquent consumer account in the amount 
of $58. He claims this debt is paid, but provided no documentation showing payment.18 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of 
$71. He provided documentation showing payment of this debt on June 28, 2010, by 
electronic transfer from his bank account.19 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of 
$286. He acknowledged that this debt remains unpaid.20   
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.v is duplicative of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l and 
will be resolved in favor of Applicant.21    
 Applicant indicated he would submit documentation post-hearing showing that he 
paid the debts indicated in his testimony. The record was held open for more than 30 
days after the hearing, but he did not submit any documentation showing payment of 
any debts. He also stated in his testimony that he had not received financial counseling. 
He did hire a law firm to dispute accounts on his credit report, but he became 
dissatisfied with their results, so he ended the relationship.22  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
18 Id. 
19 Id. 
 
20 Id. 
 
21 Id. 
 
22 Tr. at 47, 80, 83, 90-91. 
 
 
6 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Although Applicant has paid some debts, most of the debts are still owed. They 
are not infrequent and there is no evidence to support the assertion that they will not 
recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced a period of unemployment and underemployment. These 
are conditions beyond his control. He also claims that he trusted W to pay his bills, but 
she used the money for other things and left him with the resulting delinquent debts. 
This is not a condition beyond his control. He chose to live with and trust W with his 
finances. However, with respect to his unemployment-underemployment situation that 
was beyond his control, in order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, the Applicant 
must also act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s actions do not show 
responsible behavior. He has done very little to resolve the majority of his debts, despite 
having the resources to do so since obtaining his current job two years ago. AG ¶ 20(b) 
is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not seek financial counseling to assist with his delinquent debts. He 
paid his medical debts, one school loan, and a consumer debt, but he failed to 
document payments to the remainder of his creditors. His remaining debts remain 
 
8 
 
unsettled and unresolved. Therefore, his finances are not being resolved and are not 
under control. His attempts to reach settlements with his creditors are insufficient to 
support a finding that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve his 
remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable. He offered no documentary 
evidence to dispute any of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered his periods of unemployment and underemployment. I also 
considered the domestic situation he faced with W. I also considered his Air Force 
service and his recent deployment in his current position. However, he has done very 
little to resolve his debts. He claimed to have paid several of the debts, but provided no 
documentary support for those claims. His past financial track record reflects a 
troublesome financial history that causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.p:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q – 1.t:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.u:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.v:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
