 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08550 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen Douglas Gardella, Esq. 
 
December 28, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his Personal Conduct and his Sexual 
Conduct. He falsified his April 2010 e-QIP and viewed sexually explicit materials 
involving minors. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
E, Personal Conduct, and D, Sexual Behavior. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 12, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge in the instant matter. The case was assigned to me on 
October 5, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 12, 2011, and scheduled 
 
2 
 
the hearing for October 26, 2011. Applicant requested a continuance and it was 
granted. On October 20, 2011, an Amended Notice of Hearing was issued, rescheduling 
the hearing for November 7, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. 
The Applicant offered Exhibits (AEs) A through M, which were admitted without 
objection, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on November 17, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. (Answer.) After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
  
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1990. He has a bachelor’s degree from one of the most 
prestigious schools for his field of study in the United States, and excelled academically 
during his years of schooling. He has held a security clearance since September 2001. 
He is married and has a seven-year-old son. (GE 1; AE E; AE F; Tr. 24-25, 57, 73-74.) 
 
 Prior to December 2009, Applicant held a program access clearance, which was 
granted in May 2008. During the period June 25, 2009, through July 13, 2009, Applicant 
underwent three polygraph interviews in relation to his program access clearance. He 
indicated that he was given three polygraphs because, “I guess whoever was doing the 
review felt that it wasn’t - - they didn’t get the right answers. So they needed to check on 
certain answers.” Each polygraph consisted of a pre-polygraph interview and the 
polygraph examination. Applicant indicated that he was nervous during the polygraph 
examinations, but he answered truthfully to all of the questions. (GE 3; Tr. 33-43.) 
 
 During Applicant’s second pre-polygraph interview, Applicant indicated that he 
had viewed pornography. He was further questioned on the content of the pornography, 
including questions on whether the pornography included minors. (GE 2; Tr. 33-44.) 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant received a letter advising him that his program 
access was revoked. The specific reasons for the revocation were listed as follows: 
 
During your polygraph interviews, conducted on 25-26 June 2009 and 13 
July 2009, you admitted to downloading and viewing child pornography. 
You admitted to downloading seven videos of girls under the age of 18 
engaged in sexual activity with adult males onto your home computer from 
1999 to June 2009. These videos were found when you accessed various 
adult pornography websites . . . You indicated that you watched each 
video once and then deleted them from your home computer. 
 
During the same interview, you stated that from 1998 to 2006, you also 
downloaded five pictures of girls that you believed to be 15-16 years old 
performing sex acts with adult males. These images were taken from 
 
3 
 
various links connected to adult pornographic websites. You saved these 
images on your home computer for one or two days prior to deleting them. 
(GE 3.) 
 
 In August 2010, Applicant was interviewed by a special investigator for the Office 
of Personnel Management in connection with his security clearance. As a result of that 
interview, he signed an affidavit that addressed the prior revocation of his program 
access. On it, he discussed the allegations made in the December 2009 revocation 
letter. In the affidavit he stated, “I have learned my lesson, and promise to never look at 
or download any child porno again.” (GE 2; Tr. 45-46, 79-81.) 
 
 At hearing, Applicant contended that his admissions as stated in the revocation 
letter of December 2009 took his statements out of context. He asserted that when he 
was asked if he viewed under age women, he answered, “Well I can’t answer that for 
sure. I reasonably assume that, yes, these women are over 18,” yet the person 
conducting the interview pressed him for more information. He explained that his belief 
at the time was that he didn’t know for sure whether the women in the images were 18 
years old or older. (Tr. 33-44.) 
 
 Applicant presented disclaimers from the websites he allegedly visited which 
indicate all models appearing in the photos and movies are 18 years or older. However, 
the disclaimers were only obtained in the week prior to the hearing and historical 
disclaimers dating to when the images and videos were downloaded and viewed were 
not offered into evidence. (AE G; AE H; Tr. 65-67.) 
 
 Additionally, on April 21, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On this document, he was asked in Section 25: 
Investigations and Clearance Record, “b. To your knowledge, have you EVER had a 
clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked; or been debarred 
from government employment? If “Yes,” give the action(s), date(s) of action(s), 
agency(ies), and circumstances. Note: An administrative downgrade or termination of a 
security clearance is not a revocation.” Applicant answered this question, “No.” (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant claims he initially answered, “Yes,” to Section 25.b. because he had his 
program access clearance revoked in December 2009. He indicated that his facility 
security officer (FSO) who reviewed his e-QIP instructed him to change his answer to, 
“No,” after she could not find a record of his revocation in his security files. Applicant 
had difficulties remembering the FSO’s name and he did not provide a copy of the first 
e-QIP he allegedly submitted or a statement from the FSO to support this claim. (GE 1; 
Tr. 28-32, 55-56.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his wife and some of his co-workers are aware of these 
allegations. He presented a number of letters of support that show Applicant is well 
respected by his supervisors, co-workers, friends, mother-in-law, and his wife. He is 
considered to be honest and moral. Of his letters of recommendation, it is unclear if 
each of the authors knew of the specific allegations involved in this case (although a few 
of the letters refer to knowledge of accusations without specifically addressing what they 
 
4 
 
are). He also presented documentation of numerous awards, certificates, and accolades 
he received while working for his present employer. (AEs A through D, AE F; AEs I 
through M.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group.  
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant has made contradictory statements to the 
government concerning relevant facts in this case with respect to both his viewing of 
pornographic materials depicting minors and his answer to Section 25.b. on his April 
 
6 
 
2010 e-QIP. He admitted downloading pictures and videos from the internet which 
depicted underage females engaged in sexual acts during a pre-polygraph interview. He 
gave a detailed explanation that he downloaded seven videos and five pictures of 
underage girls performing sex acts. He again admitted he viewed minors engaged in 
sexual acts in his affidavit when he promised, “to never look at or download any child 
porno again.” (Emphasis added.) However at hearing, he denied admitting viewing 
underage women. Instead, he asserted that the women must have been 18-years-old or 
older due to the disclaimers on the websites. He indicated that he only told the 
interviewer that it was possible some of the women were not of age and that he could 
not be sure of their ages. His testimony at hearing was not credible. There is no proof 
the disclaimers were on the websites from 1998 to 2009. Applicant’s inconsistent 
statements indicate he exhibits questionable judgment and candor. Further, after his 
program clearance was revoked, he failed to disclose that revocation on his April 2010 
e-QIP. Applicant has not shown himself to be trustworthy and could be vulnerable to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. The Government has established sufficient 
concern under AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), 16(c), and 16(e) to disqualify Applicant from 
possessing a clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to 
correct his falsification or concealment. Instead, he denied he intentionally falsified the 
 
7 
 
e-QIP and made semantic arguments which in essence retracted his statement that he 
viewed underage girls performing sex acts. He provided no evidence other than his self-
serving testimony that indicates he was ill-advised in completing his e-QIP. His self-
serving claim that the FSO advised him to input, “No,” on the e-QIP is not credible, 
given his difficulty in being honest with the Government on the issue of viewing child-
pornography. While his lack of judgment displayed in his choice to download underage 
girls performing sex acts last occurred about two years ago, Applicant has done nothing 
to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. He failed to take 
responsibility for his actions and has not demonstrated concrete steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant has not 
provided information in this record to show that he has met his burden of proof for 
mitigation of his personal conduct. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
Appellant has clearly engaged in sexual behavior that reflects a lack of discretion 
and judgment. He downloaded seven videos and five pictures of underage girls 
performing sex acts. The above disqualifying condition has been established.  
 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
8 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Appellant’s conduct was not an 
isolated incident, but occurred multiple times between 1998 through 2009. Further, by 
arguing that he was unsure whether the women in the videos and pictures were in fact 
under 18, in essence he asserts that he did not do anything wrong. Without 
acknowledging wrong-doing, I cannot hold that such actions are unlikely to recur, 
despite his promises to, “never look at or download any child porno again.” It is possible 
that his past conduct could serve as a basis for coercion in the future. While the 
downloading of seven videos and five pictures of underage girls performing sex acts 
was done in private at his residence, the sexual victimization of the children in those 
photos and videos was in no way consensual.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has performed successfully at work, receiving many awards and 
recognition for his performance. He is trusted by his supervisors, friends, colleagues, 
and family. However, his deliberately dishonest conduct and sexual behavior indicates a 
lack of judgment and trustworthiness, and raises doubts as to whether he understands 
what is required of those who hold security clearances. He is a mature individual who is 
accountable for his voluntary choices, and failed to demonstrate either rehabilitation or 
reduced potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to overcome the doubts raised about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative 
guidelines. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
