Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government’s exhibits (GE) 1-4, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A-D. AE D1
was timely received post hearing.
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-07432
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 15 August 2011 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered, requesting a hearing. DOHA2
assigned the case to me 4 November 2011, and I convened a hearing 1 December
2011. DOHA received the transcript 9 December 2011.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the drug-related SOR allegations, but denied falsifying his
August 2005 clearance application and having his special access request denied in
December 2008 for drug involvement and personal conduct. He is a 55-year-old
process engineer employed by a defense contractor since April 2005. He seeks to
retain the clearance he was issued in 2005. 
Applicant used marijuana fairly frequently in the 1970s when he was a teenager.
He also used LSD about 6 to 12 times in the 1970s. In 1977, he enlisted in the U.S.
military. During the recruiting process, his recruiter broadly hinted at the amount of drug
use that would pass muster and not hold up his enlistment. Applicant took the hint and
disclosed on his enlistment documents only that he had used marijuana experimentally.
He did not disclose his LSD use, or the full extent of his marijuana use. He does not
recall if he had to complete a drug waiver to enlist in the military.
Applicant was accepted into the military and was the honor recruit during basic
training. He was a standout student at his follow-on professional school. However, from
March 1977 until about 1980, he used marijuana monthly and used LSD once in about
1978. By 1980, he had stopped using illegal drugs, partly because he was no longer
interested in using marijuana and partly because the military had begun random testing
for illegal drug use. He held a clearance from 1982 to 1983 while in the military. He did
not disclose his military drug use on his clearance application. Applicant finished basic
training as an E-3 and left the military as an E-6 in March 1983.
After Applicant left the military in March 1983, he did not use illegal drugs again
until about 1996, when he began using marijuana. He used marijuana until 2000 or
2001, when he again stopped. In 2004, he bought marijuana two to three times for a
friend of his who suffered from debilitating migraine headaches and had asked him to
get marijuana for her. He knew the purchases were illegal, but rationalized his conduct
because his friend got so much relief from using the marijuana. At the time of the
purchases, Applicant was serving as the national outreach coordinator for a national
organization advocating relaxed drug laws for medical marijuana use.
When Applicant applied for his industrial security clearance in August 2005, he
failed to disclose his marijuana use from 1998 to 2000/2001 (question 24a) or his
marijuana purchases in 2004 (question 24c). He rationalized his answers by telling
himself that the marijuana use “didn’t count” or “didn’t matter” (Tr. 72) and the marijuana
purchases were not for his personal use. Neither question has such a qualifier, and
while Applicant now acknowledges that his thinking was wrong, he cannot bring himself
to acknowledge that he knew at the time that his answers were deliberately false (Tr.
81-85). However, he admitted that he feared the consequences of disclosing the truth
(Tr. 72-73). The summary of Applicant’s February 2006 interview with a Government
investigator does not record any discussion of Applicant’s drug history (GE 2, 3).
3
Applicant obtained his clearance as a result of this background investigation and
held it without incident until his company nominated him for special access with another
government organization (AGO). In March 2008, Applicant completed a supplemental
application on which he again denied any history of drug involvement, which at this point
would have required him to disclose only his 2004 drug purchases, the rest of his drug
involvement being more than seven years old. During the next few months, Applicant
made three trips to AGO and underwent at least two polygraphs. Applicant initially
denied that he had any drug involvement, and acknowledges that he did not disclose his
drug history until the examiner confronted him with the assessment that Applicant
seemed to be hiding something (Tr. 74-75, 111-113)
Once his drug history came to light, AGO acted to deny Applicant’s request for
special access based on his drug use and personal conduct (GE 4). Applicant did not
appeal AGO’s decision.
Applicant’s current (Tr. 16) and former (Tr. 28) supervisors consider him honest
and trustworthy, and recommend him for his clearance. They consider the misconduct
noted in the SOR inconsistent with what they know of Applicant. Applicant advised them
of the misconduct after he received the SOR.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to be used to evaluate an applicant’s
suitability for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess both
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and
situation presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense
consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The presence or absence of a
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific
guidelines should be followed where a case can be measured against them, as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of a clearance. Considering the
SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant adjudicative guideline is
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to Applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
As no one has a right to a clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel4
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .; (b) deliberately providing false or misleading
information regarding relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . .;
The falsifications and omissions that were not alleged in the SOR may not be considered on the merits of hte5
Guideline E allegations, but may be considered as relevant to the Applicant’s credibility, his whole person
analysis, and to establish absence of mistake on the falsifications that were alleged.
4
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not completely mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s use of
marijuana and LSD and his marijuana purchases are mitigated largely by the passage
of time the same as they would be mitigated if they had been alleged as drug
involvement. Beyond that, however, the drug involvement has no lingering security
significance under Guideline E because it comes into play here only if the conduct is not
fully cognizable under another guideline. Applicant’s drug involvement is fully cognizable
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The Government implicitly acknowledged this by
not alleging the conduct under Guideline H.
Nevertheless, Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his
multiple misrepresentations and falsifications on Government documents and to
Government investigators. Applicant falsified his enlistment documents in 1977.
Although not alleged in the SOR, he falsified a clearance application in approximately
1982. He did so to first obtain, and then retain, his military employment. He deliberately
failed to disclose his drug history on his August 2005 clearance application. Although
not alleged in the SOR, he also failed to mention his drug history during a February
2006 subject interview with a Government investigator, deliberately failed to disclose his
drug history on a March 2008 application for supplemental access, and deliberately
failed to disclose his drug history during subsequent polygraph examinations until he
was confronted by the examiner with indications that Applicant seemed to be having
trouble with some of the questions.  Applicant’s falsifications and omissions were made4
to first obtain, and then retain, the clearances necessary for his employment with a
Government contractor. The falsifications and omissions alleged were enough to shift
the burden of persuasion to Applicant to refute or mitigate the Government’s
information.  5
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant did not disclose this adverse information
until his polygraph examination, and then only when the examiner told Applicant that
¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification6
before being confronted with the facts;
5
Applicant was having trouble with some of the questions.  Applicant argues that6
because the full extent of his drug history is now known to the Government, he has no
reason to falsify that drug history in the future. Applicant urges too narrow a view of the
evidence. Applicant has demonstrated that he is willing to falsify, omit, or misrepresent
adverse information in his background in order to obtain or retain employment and
clearances. Applicant’s failure to disclose this information demonstrates a lack of candor
required of cleared personnel. The Government has an interest in examining all relevant
and material adverse information about an applicant before making a clearance
decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse
information in a timely fashion, not when they perceive disclosure to be prudent or
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about
himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
Government interests. Finally, Applicant is unable to squarely admit that he deliberately
falsified his drug history during his military career and his later clearance processes, a
factor that seriously undercuts any claims to rehabilitation. I resolve Guideline E against
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs d-e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs f-h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
