1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-07070
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 7, 2007. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 8, 2011, detailing security concerns
under Guideline K, handling protected information, and Guideline E, personal conduct,
that provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her a security clearance. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009), (J.
Billett, concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security
suitability. See ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App.
Bd. Nov. 17, 2009).
GE 1; AE G; Tr. 119-120. 2
2
Applicant received the SOR on April 19, 2011. She answered it on May 3, 2011
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request,
and Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 2, 2011. I received the case
assignment on June 20, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 6, 2011, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 26, 2011. The Government offered exhibits
marked as GE 1 through GE 5, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant testified. She submitted AE A through AE J, which were received
and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript
(Tr.) on August 3, 2011. I held the record open until August 9, 2011, for Applicant to
submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE K through AE DD, which were
received and admitted without objection. The record closed on August 9, 2011.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a,
1.b, 2.a, and 2.d-2.g of the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of
fact. She denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c of the SOR.  She also provided1
additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following
additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 58 years old, works as a photo technician for a Department of
Defense contractor. She has worked in her job and location for 18 years, although her
employer changed in 2009. She has received numerous performance awards as a
civilian employee, including a team excellence award in September 2009 for her
exceptional contribution to an airdrop test and a team excellence award in November
2010 for her work over a two-month period on photographing two vehicles both day and
night.2
She served in the United States Marine Corps from 1972 to 1974 and from
January 1979 until November 1990. She received an honorable discharge from the
Marine Corps. During her nearly 14 years of military service, she held a security
clearance without any violations. While in the Marine Corps, she received a National
Defense Service Medal, three good conduct medals, a meritorious mast, and numerous
letters of appreciation. As a Marine, she worked as a postal clerk for three years. The
GE 1; AE E; AE F; AE H; AE J; Tr. 41.3
GE 1; Tr. 40-42.4
3
Marine Corps then trained her as a photographer, a duty she performed for the
remaining years of her military service.3
Applicant married in 1974 and again in 1993. She has been divorced since 2004.
She has a daughter, who is 36 years old, and a son, who is 32 years old. Her 88-year-
old mother lives with her, as does her daughter and 4-year-old granddaughter. She
attended college, but did not receive a degree.4
The SOR raises the following security violations in paragraph 1:
a. In April 2010, you failed to properly secure a classified security card, in
violation of paragraphs 5-100, 5-303 of the National Industrial Security
Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), February 2006.
b. In April 2009, you failed to properly secure a classified security card, by
taking the classified card home instead of replacing it in a secure
container, in violation of paragraphs 5-100, 5-303 of the NISPOM,
February 2006.
The SOR raises the following personal conduct issues in paragraph 2:
a. You received two written reprimands from your employer for security
violations, as set forth in paragraph 1, above.
b. In May 2010, you received an oral reprimand for violating work rules
and dishonesty by overcharging time on your time card in January 2010.
c.  In May 2010, you received an oral warning for violating work rules by
discussing the security violation set forth in subparagraph 1.a., above.
d.  In May 2009, you received a written warning for a security violation for
failing to use seatbelts in a vehicle on the Armed Forces installation.
e.  In February 2006, you received a written warning and placed on 6
months of probation for improperly securing an individual’s Social Security
Number and other personal information. This was your second such
warning.
f.  In August 2005, you received an oral warning for violating procedures.
g. In May 2010, as a result of the security and rules violations set forth in
subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.f., your employer filed a Last Chance
The full name for D will not be used in this decision.5
Response to SOR; GE 3, p. 7; Tr. 80-82.6
4
Agreement whereby any further violation could result in employment
termination.
In 2005, the Department of the Army began implementing changes in the rules
and procedures on how promotional photographs were to be digitally photographed and
sent to D.  Problems with the computer programs occurred, including problems with the5
background color, with the account number and code, font size, location of data, and
the computer software. During the months of implementation of the new processes,
Applicant and her co-workers kept in constant contact with D to resolve the problems
encountered. On August 15, 2005, management assigned Applicant to the studio work
area where she worked when needed, which was not every day. She prepared three
photographs and submitted them to her government counterpart, who returned any
photographs with a problem to be corrected. Her photo submissions had the wrong
format for the date and one photo was the wrong size. Two of the three photographs
were returned to Applicant for correction. She corrected the size on the one photograph,
but her date corrections remained wrong. She met with management the day after this
incident and advised them that the problem would continue as there were no standard
operating procedures. Within 24 hours, management suggested to her lead, not her,
that a template for photograph captions be prepared to eliminate issues with incorrect
formats. Applicant denies receiving an oral warning for the errors on this day. However,
the record indicates that an oral warning was given on this day for not following proper
procedures when entering information onto the photo system, not paying attention to
processing data and following prescribed procedures, and not filling out the photo log
book correctly. Applicant signed this document on August 29, 2005. No sensitive
information was compromised as a result of this incident.6
Six months later, in February 2006, Applicant again worked in the studio area,
taking photographs. Once she completed the photograph, her duties required her to
insert a name, date, rank, and social security number on the photograph. During the
course of the day, she took several photographs, inserted the information, and placed
the completed photograph in the desk because this small office did not have a safe or
other locked area to place or store cameras, cards, or data. After working in the office
for several hours, Applicant had an opportunity to go to the ladies room. She left a
photograph and related information in a folder on the desk under the computer
keyboard and closed the door to the room, asking a co-worker to make sure no one
entered the room. When she returned five minutes later, she discovered the folder and
information gone because a Mr. R had entered the room through another door, and
after searching, Mr. R. discovered the folder with the information. After this incident,
management placed a safe in the room to store cameras, cards, and data. Applicant
denies receiving an oral or written statement because of this incident. The record
contains an employee discipline report dated February 9, 2006, which shows a written
warning and six months of probation for Applicant. The report is signed only in the
Response to SOR; GE 3, p. 6; Tr. 82-84.7
Response to SOR; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 50-56.8
5
employee box, but the signature is not legible. Her managers did not sign this
document; thus, this document does not constitute a valid disciplinary report.  7
In April 2009, one week after being assigned to a new section, Applicant reported
to work at 3:00 a.m. for the purpose of asking her supervisor for a return to the day shift.
She was not accustomed to working nights and had begun to experience problems with
sleeping and staying awake. On the night in question, management assigned her to a
two-part program to take photographs. One program part involved classified
photographs, and the second program part involved unclassified photographs. Applicant
signed out a blank classified card on which photographs were to be taken, located a
required blue bag for the card, as she had not yet been assigned a blue bag, placed the
card into the blue bag, locked the blue bag, placed the blue bag into a larger blue bag,
locked the second blue bag, and placed the blue bag into her briefcase. She assembled
her camera equipment and obtained a blank unclassified card for photographs. She
drove to the work site. After she arrived, she removed the classified card and inserted it
into her camera. She placed the unclassified card in her pocket. At the photograph site,
she was told she only needed to take unclassified photographs. She removed the
classified card from her camera without taking any photographs and placed it in her
purse. She inserted the unclassified card in her camera and took the required
photographs. At the end of a 13-hour work day, she returned to her office, removed the
unclassified card from her camera, and placed it in the process bin. She worked on
paperwork related to her photographs taken that day, then left for home around 7:00
p.m., more than six hours after the end of her usual 10-hour work day. While asleep that
evening, she received a telephone call asking about a classified card. Initially, she
denied having a classified card, but then remembered that she had signed out a
classified card. She checked her bag, found the blank classified card, and called her
office with this information. She dressed and returned to her office before 5:00 a.m with
the card. At all times, the blank classified card remained within her positive control and
no classified information was compromised.  8
The next day Applicant’s supervisor, Mr. D., removed her from the program. He
also advised her that he had spoken to their government counterpart, who told him that
as long as there was no data on the card, there was no compromise of national security.
Her supervisor also advised her that as long as she had positive control over the card,
which she did, the government would not issue a report if the card was returned timely.
Her employer’s administrative security clerk prepared an incident report. Applicant’s
supervisor gave her an oral warning at the time. She did not receive any other discipline
for this incident in April 2009. Nearly 13 months later, on May 4, 2010, a supervisor,
whose identity is not in the file, prepared a discipline report, showing a written warning
for this incident. It also indicated  that a failure to immediately improve could result in
time off or immediate termination. Applicant never saw the discipline report until she
opened a  package of materials from DOHA related to her hearing. She never signed
Response to SOR; GE 3; Tr. 56.9
GE 3 contains a copy of a parking ticket given to Applicant on March 9, 2009 for incorrectly parking her10
personal car on base. This ticket is not listed in the SOR nor did Applicant receive a written warning for the
ticket.
Response to SOR; GE 3; Tr. 79.11
Response to SOR; AE BB; Tr. 67-71. 12
6
this discipline report. On its face, the report states that her signature would indicate she
received it. 9
In early 2009, Applicant received a telephone call from her daughter, advising
that Applicant’s elderly mother had passed out, had fallen and hit her head, and was
being taken to the hospital. Applicant panicked. She left the office and entered her
personal vehicle. She drove out of her work grounds without securing her seat belt, a
safety violation. The gate guard noticed and gave her a ticket on February 24, 2009.
Management prepared an employee discipline report, dated March 31, 2009, for a
safety violation, which was her first warning for a safety violation. The report indicated
that it was a written warning, and that Applicant did not have any previous warnings.10
Under the Improvement Required section of the discipline report, she was given 365
days to obey all base traffic laws and speed limits, which she has done. Applicant
signed for this disciplinary report.  11
In late January 2010, substantial rain fell where Applicant lives and works.
Significant flooding occurred at her work base, and the Government closed the work
base and sent employees home from work. Applicant arrived at work on January 21,
2010. On this date, she worked 5.5 hours before the base was closed. She recorded
her time worked and an additional 4.5 hours for weather issues on her approved time
sheet. She returned to work on January 22, 2010 as instructed by her team engineer at
the photo site. Mr. D, her supervisor, arrived  soon after her. He questioned her
presence in the office, and she told him about her instructions the previous day. She
asked for instructions on how to charge her time, but did not receive clear instructions
from Mr. D. Her approved time sheet reflects that she charged five hours for her time on
January 22, 2010, after being advised that the Government would pay for her time.12
Applicant denies Mr. D formally counseled her in January 2010. The record
contains a memorandum for record which Mr. D prepared on January 25, 2010. He
indicates that Applicant improperly charged her time on January 22, 2010 and that he
counseled her about how to properly charge her time. Her approved employee time
sheet, dated January 26, 2010, shows 5 work hours for January 22, 2010. On May 4,
2010, three-and-one-half months later, Mr. D submitted an employee discipline report
indicating that Applicant reported improper time on January 21, 2010 and January 22,
2010. He indicated that the disciplinary action was an oral warning for violation of work
rules and dishonesty, but he did not list a specific time for improvement. Applicant
denies any knowledge of this disciplinary report until she received a package from
Response to SOR; GE 3; Tr. 67-71.13
This letter references severe flooding in early May 2010. Since the letter references an oral warning14
disciplinary report dated May 3, 2010 for flooding in late January 2010, I find that the letter refers to the
January flooding.
AE A; AE B.15
Response to SOR; GE 3; Tr. 57-58.16
7
DOHA. Her denial is supported by the fact that her signature is not on the May 4, 2010
disciplinary report. On its face, the report states that her signature would indicate she
received it.13
Applicant submitted a letter from a Human Resources (HR) deputy, dated July
21, 2011.  The HR deputy advised that the employees were not directed to the proper14
account for time reporting for the emergency situation. The HR deputy further advised
that Applicant and the majority of the company’s employees were not properly advised
on how to charge the flood time. The employees were verbally warned to allow them to
correct their time card, not as a disciplinary action. On July 22, 2011, the HR deputy
wrote a second letter to explain the purpose of the oral warning documented in
Applicant’s personnel file. The oral discipline reports were meant to serve as a
memorandum for the record only and are not considered a written disciplinary report.15
In April 2010, a second security incident occurred. Applicant arrived at work at
4:00 a.m., as she needed to be at a specific work site at 5:30 a.m. Her original
assignment had been moved back a few days. Mr. D then told her that he needed her to
go to another work site immediately. Mr. D. could not tell her if the job was for classified
or unclassified photographs. After she retrieved her cameras and gear, she signed out a
blank classified card and a blank unclassified card under the procedures for use at the
site. As required, she placed the blank classified card in the blue bag and locked it, then
placed the blue bag in her briefcase, which she locked. She placed her briefcase in the
government vehicle she was driving. She called for clearance to her destination and
drove there. When she arrived, she asked the road guard for permission to enter the
work area. The road guard called someone to verify that Applicant had access. After
several minutes, the road guard advised Applicant that the photographic shoot had
been cancelled. During her wait, Applicant had inserted the blank classified card into her
camera. She removed it when she learned she would not be needed at the work site
and secured the card in its blue bag and placed it in her brief case, which she locked
and placed on the floor of her government vehicle. She drove to her work building,
parked her car in the designated, secure government parking area, and walked into the
building, leaving her brief case in the locked car.16
Mr. D advised that he did not have a project for her around 6:45 a.m. Since Mr. D
did not have an immediate assignment for her, she requested and received
authorization to take the morning CORE classes. She attended class from 7:30 a.m until
noon. During this time, the blank classified card remained locked in the blue bag in her
Id.17
8
locked brief case in her locked government vehicle. She was the only person who knew
where the card was located. She returned to her government vehicle and removed keys
to the security bag from her person, unlocked her brief case, and placed the keys in the
brief case, which she then closed and turned the combination lock. She believed that
the brief case was locked. She drove to her work building and received a new
assignment. She never started any new assignment as her work assignments continued
to change during the course of the afternoon. She remained in and around her work
building, and her government car remained locked and parked in the designed secure
government parking area. She kept the card in her car as she had anticipated another
photo assignment before the end of her work day. She left work at 5:00 p.m. without
returning the blank classified card to its secured box. Applicant acknowledged that she
failed to follow procedures for returning the classified blank card and her own
procedures for protecting the blank classified cards when she did not return the blank
classified card to its secured box. Applicant never took any pictures with the classified
card. At all times in question, the card was blank and no classified information was
compromised.17
After the second incident, Applicant’s employer suspended her from work for 14
days. When she returned to work, she met with managers. During this counseling
session, management asked if all her questions regarding her recent security incident
had been answered. Management also advised her not to disclose any facts about her
security incident beyond this meeting. They advised her that she would be transferred to
another work area, where she does little work with classified materials, but continues to
use her photographic skills. After the meeting, management prepared a disciplinary
report for an oral warning. The facts section states as follows:
[Applicant] was counseled to make certain that all of her questions
regarding her recent security incident, for which she was disciplined, have
been answered. The . . . Manager, in a meeting with [Applicant] and J. M.
on 3 May 10 in J’s office, was told that the events and circumstances
surrounding her recent infraction are not to be disclosed beyond the
confines of J’s office, other than to senior [company] management.
Furthermore, [Applicant] was told by the group manager that no one else,
other that [company] management, needs to know about her situation.
In the Improvement Required section, the report states, “Employee must not complain
about or disclose any information regarding her incident involving a security incident.”
Finally, the Failure to Improve section states, “If [Applicant] discloses or complains
about her situation regarding the security incident and subsequent disciplinary action to
other employee(s), she may receive a written warning, time off without pay or
termination of employment.” Applicant’s signature is not on this disciplinary report.
Applicant denies telling anyone about this incident and her resulting discipline. The
GE 3. Applicant testified to telling co-workers to “dot their i’s and t’s” and denies telling anyone about her18
security violation issue. Tr. 72-77.
GE 3.19
The remaining provisions of this section describe the criteria for an approved storage container or area.20
GE 4; GE 5; AE X - AE Z.21
9
record does not show she has been disciplined for telling co-workers about the security
incident in April 2010 as alleged in the SOR.18
On May 25, 2010, Applicant again met with management at her company. They
required her to sign a broad Last Chance Agreement with no end date. Under the terms
of this agreement, if she fails to follow security-related rules or policies, she will be
immediately terminated.19
The record contains an excerpt from the National Industrial Security Program
Operating Manual (NISPOM), DoD 5220.22-M, dated February 28, 2006. In the first
paragraph, the NISPOM states:
Contractors shall be responsible for safeguarding classified information in
their custody or under their control. Individuals are responsible for
safeguarding classified information entrusted to them. The extent of
protection afforded classified information shall be sufficient to reasonably
foreclose the possibility of its loss or compromise. See Section 5-100.
General.
Section 5-303 directs that SECRET material shall be stored in a GSA-
approved security container, an approved, vault, or closed area. . .20
  
Requirements for the physical protection of classified material are set out in Section 5-
300, et seq. The record also contains a copy of the company standard operating
procedures (SOP) for use of classified media in 2010. The contractor’s SOP 16-001 in
paragraph 7 describes the process for signing out, using, storing, and signing in media
used for classified images. However, the SOP does not define the term “classified
media” or indicate when unclassified media becomes classified media. SOP 16-001,
paragraph 7b(1) states, “Keep positive control of all classified media at all times.”  SOP
16-001, paragraph 7c(3) requires cIassified media to be signed in (and properly stored)
at the conclusion of the mission. There is no document showing if she had reviewed this
SOP. Applicant reviewed the SOP for information system security - classified and for
safeguarding classified material in an emergency on July 21, 2011, and for classified
media handling for IT systems on April 13, 2011.21
Applicant submitted copies of her training certificates for protection of classified
information. The documents reflect that she completed numerous training classes for
information assurance awareness and for awareness training. She also completed a
AE D.22
GE 3; AE I; AE K; AE M; AE P; AE Q; AE T; AE U; AE V; Tr. 129-130.23
Tr. 42-47.24
10
class on portable electronic devices and removable storage media on March 25, 2009
and April 14, 2009.22
Applicant provided 12 recent letters of recommendation and three older letters of
recommendation. The majority of these letters are from co-workers and test officers at
her place of work. All describe her as trustworthy and reliable. She has excellent work
skills and work ethics. They give her high recommendations as an individual and as a
worker. None of these individuals indicated any knowledge about the issues raised in
the SOR. She could not provide this information to them based on the May 3, 2010
meeting.23
In her current position, Applicant seldom works with classified information. When
she does work with classified information, she and another employee work together. In
the past, Applicant was granted a special White House clearance when the President
visited her work area. Department Counsel acknowledged Applicant’s forthright
testimony at the hearing. She testified credibly at the hearing and always accepted
responsibility for her conduct.24
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
11
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected
information, “Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an individual's
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such
information, and is a serious security concern.”
AG ¶ 34 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other
sensitive information; and
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by
management.      
On two occasions, Applicant failed to return two blank classified cards used to
take pictures of classified information or materials to their secured box at the conclusion
of her mission. On both occasions, Applicant obtained a blank classified card to use in
her camera if she needed to take photographs of classified information or sites. She
never took any photographs on these cards. Because the cards remained blank at all
12
times, and thus, contained no pictures, she did not fail to protect classified information
or other sensitive information as required by this guideline and under the NISPOM. 
The SOR cites NISPOM Sections 5-100 and 5-303, providing notice to Applicant
of the allegations of security concern. Neither of these provisions describe handling of
media, in this case a photographic card marked classified, which did not contain
classified information, that do not contain classified information. The contractor’s SOP
16-001 in paragraph 7 describes the process for signing out, using, storing, and signing
in media used for classified images. However, the SOP does not define the term
“classified media” or indicate when unclassified media becomes classified media. SOP
16-001, paragraph 7b(1) states, “Keep positive control of all classified media at all
times.”  SOP 16-001, paragraph 7c(3) requires cIassified media to be signed in (and
properly stored) at the conclusion of the mission. If Applicant was not in personal
possession of “classified media” or that media was not stored in the safe at the
conclusion of the mission, she was in technical violation her employer’s SOP.  
In April 2009, Applicant initially locked the blank classified card as required.
During her photo shoot, she placed the card in her purse which was in her possession,
giving her positive control over the card at all times. In April 2010, she properly locked
the card in a blue bag, locked the blue bag in her briefcase, and locked the briefcase in
her government car. She parked the car in secured government parking. These actions
met the NISPOM criteria to reasonably foreclose the possibility of loss or compromise. 
At some point, Applicant’s office apparently decided that security would be
improved if all media, classified and unclassified, were treated the same. I conclude that
her handling of the classified card did not violate the NISPOM or the SOP because the
media did not contain any classified images. Applicant believed that she violated the
SOP by failing to maintain positive control or to properly store the media, and I will
therefore assume the Government established AG ¶¶ 34(g) and 34(h).
The Handling of Protected Information guideline also includes examples of
conditions that can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG
¶ ¶ 35(a) through 35(c), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of
security responsibilities.  
   In April 2009, Applicant started work at 3:00 a.m. and continued to work until 7:00
p.m. that evening, a 16-hour work day. By the end of the day, she was exhausted.
These long work hours and work days are unusual, as she normally works 10 hours a
day, and such work hours are not likely to recur. The second incident occurred, in part,
13
because Applicant’s supervisor continued to give her work assignments, then would
change his mind about the assignment. By retaining the photo card in her secured brief
case, Applicant was prepared for her next anticipated assignment. The confusion of this
day was out of the ordinary and not likely to recur. Applicant is very clear about her
responsibilities towards safeguarding classified information and has a positive attitude
towards the discharge of her security responsibilities. AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply, and
the SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b are found in favor of Applicant. Even if the allegations
are not mitigated under Guideline K, they are mitigated under the Whole-Person
Concept, infra.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and,
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources; and
14
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment.
The record contains four disciplinary reports prepared on May 3, 2010 or May 4,
2010. These reports concern the security incident in April 2009, the time incident in
January 2010, the security incident in April 2010, and the counseling session in May
2010. Each report provides a space for an employee to acknowledge receipt of the
disciplinary report. Applicant’s signature is not on any of these reports, and she denies
knowledge of any formal disciplinary action for the incidents listed in three reports. She
does not deny disciplinary action for the April 2010 incident where she failed to return a
blank classified card to its proper secure storage box. The SOR incorrectly alleges that
Applicant received these disciplinary reports, when she did not. The Government has
not established this SOR allegation as written. Applicant admitted to the underlying
conduct in each allegation. Thus, the Government has established in SOR allegation
2.a. that the underlying conduct shows a violation of company rules by Applicant.
Applicant specifically denied allegations 2.b and 2.c. In January 2010, (SOR ¶
2.b) Applicant filled out her time cards improperly because of a lack of guidance from
her supervisor. Applicant did not violate any rules, but acted in good aith after
attempting to get guidance from her supervisor on recording her work time. A few days
later, HR provided clearer guidance for recording employee time due to the emergency
situation. While her record has been documented, HR does not consider this
documentation a disciplinary action. Applicant’s actions in January 2010 reflect an
honest mistake, not an attempt to violate the rules. Allegation 2.b is found in favor of
Applicant.
Management met with Applicant in May 2010 to determine if she had any
questions about her April 2010 security incident. Management then instructed her and
those in the meeting not to discuss her security incident with anyone, except senior
management. These instructions are prospective. On its face, this employee disciplinary
report does not reflect any misconduct by Applicant, only possible discipline for a future
violation. There is no evidence that Applicant violated the counseling given her. SOR
allegation 2.c, as written, incorrectly asserts that Applicant received an oral warning as
a disciplinary action, for discussing her security violation. SOR allegation 2.c is found in
favor of Applicant.
As for the allegation of a security violation in SOR ¶ 1.d, the employee discipline
report indicates that the report was prepared because of a safety violation, not a
security violation. Applicant admits receiving the ticket. She signed for the disciplinary
report. Her failure to buckle her seatbelt is a rules violation.
Overall, the SOR allegations under Guideline E reflect a pattern of rules violation
in the workplace and a failure to follow the employer’s standard operating procedures
for handling blank classified photo cards between August 2005 and April 2010. The
Government has established its case under AG ¶¶ 16(d)(4) and 16(f).
15
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 17(a) through
17(g), and the following are potentially applicable:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability.
Applicant has taken full responsibility for the actual incidents alleged in the SOR,
even though she has denied receiving disciplinary reports for many of the incidents. The
safety violation is the only safety occurrence in 18 years of employment. Because of the
infrequency of safety violations over the last 18 years by Applicant, there is little
likelihood that similar violations will occur. She has mitigated the Government’s security
concerns as to SOR ¶ 2.d under AG ¶ 17(d).
Applicant’s employer moved her to another media work area after the April 2010
incident. She continues to read the SOP provisions required for her work section, which
keeps her current on her employer’s procedures for handling classified information.
After the incidents in August 2005 and in February 2006, Applicant made suggestions to
management for simple changes to eliminate future problems. Computer formatting
problems are common, especially when new systems are being implemented, and are
easily resolved. In August 2005, following Applicant’s suggestion, management
developed a template to prevent formatting problems. In February 2006, again following
Applicant’s suggestion, management installed a secure safe to store sensitive
information in the small office where Applicant had worked. Applicant proposed simple
solutions to prevent future problems of the type she experienced, and management
found her solutions acceptable. These particular problems have not occurred for
Applicant again. The evidence of record indicates that steps have been taken to
eliminate future problems for Applicant. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) are partially applicable.
Even if the allegations are not mitigated under Guideline E, they are mitigated under the
Whole-Person Concept, infra.
16
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
has worked as a photographer for many years. Until 2005, she performed her duties
without any identifiable problems. Over the next almost five years, six incidents
occurred, some of which are clear violations of workplace rules, even though the
incidents in question did not result in a compromise of classified or proprietary
information. The incidents are the result of carelessness and inattention to rules, which
raises a question of whether Applicant is acting or can act responsibly in handling
classified information.
Applicant acknowledges each incident and admits her actions. The information in
the record provides troubling facts about the disciplinary reports and accompanying
implications. In January 2010, confusion arose on how to charge work time when the
base closed because of flooding. Her supervisor wrote a memorandum for the record,
indicating that he counseled her because she improperly charged her time on January
22, 2010. After receiving guidance from HR, he gave her guidance on how to charge
her time for that day, which she did. Management approved her revised time sheet on
January 26, 2010. The letter from the HR deputy supports this version of the events.
17
Most base employees improperly charged their time for the base closure. In May 2010,
after Applicant’s second incident with a blank classified photo card, employee
disciplinary reports were prepared and placed in Applicant’s file without her knowledge.
Her supervisor prepared a written oral warning claiming violation of work rules and
dishonesty for reporting her time on two days, not one, in January 2010. This report
information differs significantly from the memorandum for the record and letter from the
HR deputy explaining the time-reporting problems. Three-and-one-half months after the
incident, Applicant’s supervisor expanded his version of the events in January
connected to her time card for unexplained reasons. His January 25, 2010
memorandum for the record is contemporaneous to the incident and is credible. The
employee discipline report is given less weight because of the lapse of time and the
appearance that in hindsight, he attempted to create a record of prior disciplinary action.
Applicant understood in April 2009 that an incident report would be filed with
security because she did not property return the blank classified photo card at the end
of the day. She received an oral warning from her supervisor, but no further disciplinary
action was taken. Applicant’s supervisor prepared an employee disciplinary report
concerning this incident on May 4, 2010, nearly 13 months after the incident and without
Applicant’s knowledge. When this incident occurred, he did not deem it necessary to
prepare any disciplinary report. The timing of the preparation of this report raises
questions about the legitimacy of the report and the lack of serious concern about this
incident when it occurred. As with the previous late report, this report is given less
weight because of the lapse of time and the appearance that Mr. D was attempting to
create a record of prior disciplinary action when none had occurred.
Issuing a disciplinary report for possible prospective misconduct raises some
questions about why management chose this action and the actual validity of the report
for purposes of misconduct. Oral warnings are verbal and not written as in this case.
Given that management does not allege misconduct by Applicant in the disciplinary
report, the report is given little weight as evidence to the extent it contradicts Applicant’s
statement of facts.
Applicant signed a very broad Last Chance Agreement in May 2010 and has
complied with its terms. She has a long and generally favorable employment history
with her company, as well as during her 14 years of service in the Marine Corps. Her
work performance is excellent, and her co-workers at the base consider her trustworthy.
Even after the April 2009 and April 2010 incidents, her employer gave her performance
awards, which show its confidence in her work. None of her references mentioned
knowing that she had a problem with her security clearance or the reasons for her SOR.
In light of the oral warning given to her May 2010 about not discussing her security
incidents with others, Applicant exercised good judgment in choosing not to violate the
warning given her by providing these individuals with this information. 
After a complete and thorough review of all the evidence of record, I find that
Applicant is not a security concern despite her past carelessness and inattentiveness.
She is fully aware of her responsibilities and the impact of any misstep by her in the
future.
18
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines K and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline K: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
