 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08780 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 19, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
13, 2011. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on October 18, 2011, 
and transferred to me on October 25, 2011. That same date, a Notice of Hearing was 
issued, scheduling the hearing for November 16, 2011. The hearing was held on that 
date. During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. Applicant testified and offered one exhibit which was 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. After the hearing, the record was held open until 
December 7, 2011, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. No documents 
 
2 
 
 
were submitted. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 27, 2011.  Based upon 
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, and 
denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 2.a. 
 
 Applicant is a 66-year-old quality engineer employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor, seeking to maintain his security clearance. He has worked for his 
current employer from 1978 to 1981, and from 1985 to present. He has a master’s 
degree in computer science. He is married and has no children. (Tr. at 24-27; Gov 1)  
 
Concerns were raised under financial considerations during Applicant’s periodic 
background investigation. A credit report dated August 26, 2010, revealed that 
Appellant had a federal tax lien entered against him in October 2008 in the amount of 
$15,464. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 3 at 3) He also had a $43 medical account placed for 
collection in April 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 11), and an $86 medical account placed 
for collection in March 2007. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 12)  
 
On August 11, 2010, Applicant completed a security clearance questionnaire (e-
QIP). In response to question 26c, “Have you failed to pay Federal, state, or other 
taxes, or to file a tax return, when required by law or ordinance?” Applicant answered, 
“No.” SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts in response to 
this question. It is noted that the SOR alleges an e-QIP application executed by 
Applicant on December 29, 2009. In accordance with paragraph E3.1.17, I amend the 
pleading in SOR ¶ 2.a by changing the date of the e-QIP’s execution to August 11, 
2010, in order to conform with the evidence.  
 
Another lien for $18,141.92 was recorded by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
on October 20, 2008. The lien was released on April 20, 2011, after it was paid in full. 
Applicant testified that he failed to file tax returns and pay taxes for tax years 2000, 
2001, and 2002. He had no explanation for why he did not file and pay his tax returns. 
The IRS prepared the returns for him. He entered into a payment agreement with the 
IRS and resolved this debt before the SOR was issued. It was not alleged in the SOR, 
but is discussed here for background purposes. (Tr. 35; Gov 2 at 3, 9) 
 
In 2006, Applicant sold a cabin. He had a gain after the sale. He put the 
proceeds from the sale of the cabin into a certificate of deposit (CD). In July 2006, he 
was assessed additional taxes in the amount of $12,933 related to the sale of the 
property. Applicant did not pay the tax immediately because his money was in a CD and 
he was worried about having to pay a penalty if he withdrew the funds. A second tax 
lien was filed in October 2008. Applicant arranged a payment plan with the IRS. He paid 
approximately $550 a month over a period of four years. The lien was paid in full on 
May 2, 2011. (Tr. 32, 37-44; Gov 2 at 3; AE A)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disputes the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c because he does not 
recognize the creditors. Both debts were transferred to a collection agency. He did not 
have a number where he could contact the creditors. He requested more information on 
how to contact these two creditors during his background investigation. While these two 
debts are listed on the credit report dated August 26, 2010, they are not listed on credit 
reports dated March 30, 2011, and November 15, 2011. (Tr. 21; Gov 2; Gov 3; Gov 4; 
Gov 5)  
 
Applicant has no additional delinquent accounts. From 2003 forward, he has filed 
federal and state income tax returns. He lives within his means. He testified during the 
hearing that he has $1,500 left over each month after expenses and has $13,000 in 
savings. (Tr. 31, 37; see also Gov 2 at 7) 
  
Applicant denies that he made a false statement on his e-QIP application. At the 
time he completed the application he was making monthly payments to the IRS. He 
testified that he was never formally notified of a tax lien. If he has the opportunity to 
complete a security clearance application in the future, he would do a better job of 
explaining any issues. He would never do anything to jeopardize national security. (Tr. 
20, 48-50; Response to SOR, dated August 19, 2011)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
incurred a significant federal tax debt after he sold a property in 2006. He also had two 
medical collection accounts. AG &19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required or fraudulent filing of the same) applies with respect to 
Applicant’s failure to file his annual Federal tax returns for tax years 2000, 2001, and 
2002. However, this was not alleged in the SOR.  More than likely, because Applicant 
resolved this tax debt before the SOR was issued.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
 
5 
 
 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies. Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant also had a tax debt 
related to his failure to file and pay taxes owed for tax years 2000, 2001 and 2002. He 
resolved this tax debt as well as the tax debt alleged in the SOR through payment 
agreements. The remaining two medical debts total $129 and are not listed on 
Applicant’s more recent credit reports. I find these two accounts are de minimis and not 
relevant to Applicant’s overall financial situation. While Applicant’s tax problems raised 
legitimate and serious security concerns, he has taken steps to resolve them. He 
learned a difficult lesson in the process. His problems are not likely to recur based on 
his overall financial stability.   
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply because it was within 
Applicant’s control to pay his taxes. He did not really have a good reason for failing to 
pay his tax debts. He just chose not to pay them.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant has paid his tax debts and his financial situation is under 
control.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. He resolved the tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
disputes the two remaining debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He is willing to pay 
them if he is able to contact them to verify the debt. These two debts are minimal. I find 
he attempted to resolve these accounts, but had insufficient information to contact the 
collection agencies alleged in the SOR. The debts are not listed on his recent credit 
reports.    
 
Over the past decade, Applicant made some foolish decisions pertaining to his 
federal income taxes. He eventually understood the consequences of his actions, and 
resolved his federal tax debts through payment agreements. He has learned a difficult 
lesson. Aside from the tax debts, his financial situation is stable. Applicant mitigated the 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There is sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant omitted information about his 
tax debts in response to section 26c on his e-QIP application. The omission potentially 
raises AG ¶16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities). For AG ¶16(a) to apply, the omission must be deliberate. Applicant 
believed that he did not have to answer “yes” to the question because he was making 
regular payments to the IRS. I found his explanations credible.  Guideline E is found for 
Applicant.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment history. I considered that he entered into payment plans with IRS and has 
resolved his tax debts. His financial situation is stable. He did not intentionally omit his 
 
7 
 
 
tax debts in response to 26c on the e-QIP application. He mitigated the concerns raised 
under financial considerations and personal conduct.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                               
  
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
