 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-09985 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant committed about nine misdemeanor or felony offenses from 1998 to 
August 2010. He intentionally failed to disclose derogatory information on his May 17, 
2010 security clearance application about some of his criminal offenses. Personal 
conduct and criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 17, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (GE 1). On 
July 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and J 
(criminal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked (HE 2). 
 
On August 4, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
(HE 3) On October 18, 2011, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed 
with Applicant’s case. On October 20, 2011, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. 
On November 17, 2011, Applicant’s hearing was held using video teleconference. I was 
located in Arlington, Virginia, and Department Counsel and Applicant were located in 
another state. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered ten exhibits (GE 1-10) (Tr. 
19-20), and Applicant did not offer any written evidence. There were no objections, and 
I admitted GE 1-10. (Tr. 20) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and 
Applicant’s response to the SOR as hearing exhibits. (HE 1-3) On November 28, 2011, I 
received the hearing transcript.   
 
Findings of Fact1
 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶¶ 
1.n and 1.s. (Tr. 15, 25; HE 2, 3) His admissions are accepted as factual findings. SOR 
¶ 1.n alleges that in July 2005, the police cited Applicant for Operating an Uninsured 
Motor Vehicle. Applicant denied the offense in his SOR response, and Department 
Counsel concurred the offense was not established. (Tr. 18) At the hearing, Applicant 
conceded that the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.s that he was arrested in September 2008 and 
charged with Driving on a Suspended or Revoked Driver’s License was established. (Tr. 
19)   
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old field service engineer for a defense contractor. (Tr. 6, 
22) He has held this position for three years. (Tr. 22) He served in the Navy from 
December 1998 to January 2003. (Tr. 7, 31, 33) His rate was avionics electronics 
technician. (Tr. 24) He left active duty as a Petty Officer Third Class (E-4), and he 
received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 7) In 2005, he earned an associate’s degree in 
automotive reconstruction, and in 2007, he earned a bachelor’s degree in automotive 
technology. (Tr. 7-8) In November 2011, he married, and he does not have any children. 
(Tr. 8, 22) 
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Criminal Offenses and Traffic Citations 2
 
 
In 1996 and 1997, the police issued three traffic-related citations to Applicant. In 
September 1996, Appellant was cited with and pleaded guilty to Failure to Reduce 
Speed. (SOR ¶ 1.a; HE 1, HE 2) In April 1997, Appellant was cited with and pleaded 
guilty to Front or Side Windshield Unobstructed. (SOR ¶ 1.b; HE 1, HE 2) In July 1997, 
Appellant was cited with and pleaded guilty to Operating Vehicle in a Careless and 
Imprudent Manner. (SOR ¶ 1.c; HE 1, HE 2)  
 
In 1998, the police issued two traffic-related citations to Applicant, and he had 
two felony-level arrests. In March 1998, Applicant was cited with and pleaded guilty to 
Driving Above the Speed Limit. (SOR ¶ 1.d; HE 1, HE 2) In May and July 1998, he was 
arrested for, cited with, and pleaded guilty to Operate Uninsured Motor Vehicle and 
Driving 15-20 MPH above the Limit. (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f; HE 1, HE 2) In August 1998, 
the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with Tampering with Motor Vehicle or 
Airplane, a Felony. (Tr. 25-26; SOR ¶ 1.g; HE 1, HE 2) He said a friend broke the 
window of a van, and he and the friend planned to steal items of value found in the van. 
(Tr. 26-27)  
 
About a month later, in September 1998, the police arrested Applicant, and he 
was charged with Theft or Unauthorized Control Over Property Valued at Over $300 
and Under $10,000 and Knowingly Damage Property of a Value of Over $300, 
Possession of Stolen Property, and Possession of Burglary Tools, a felony. (Tr. 28-29; 
SOR ¶ 1.h; HE 1, HE 2) Appellant stole a soda machine, and broke into several soda 
machines. (Tr. 28-29) When Appellant was stopped by the police and initially 
questioned about having a soda machine in his vehicle, he lied to the police. (Tr. 29-30) 
Upon further questioning by the police, Appellant admitted stealing the soda machines 
and several break-ins. (Tr. 30) Applicant was able to plea bargain down to a 
misdemeanor, which enabled him to join the Navy. (Tr. 31)  
 
In January 2000, the police cited Appellant for Speeding. (SOR ¶ 1.i; HE 1, HE 2) 
In December 2003, Applicant was charged with Sexual Battery; however, the charge 
was reduced to Battery and Drunk in Public. (Tr. 33; SOR ¶ 1.j; HE 1, HE 2) Applicant 
admitted that he slapped a woman he had never met on her buttocks. (Tr. 34) When he 
was arrested, he falsely denied that he committed the offense to a police officer, and 
subsequently to an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management. (Tr. 34-36; 
GE 2) 
 
In April 2004, Applicant was charged with Petty Larceny. (Tr. 35-36; SOR ¶ 1.k; 
HE 1, HE 2) He stole $17 in gas from a filing station. His theft was “my response to 
rising gas prices.” (Tr. 37) He conceded this theft showed dishonesty and 
irresponsibility. (Tr. 37) In July 2004, the police cited Applicant for Transportation or 
Carry Alcohol Liquor as a Vehicle Driver. (SOR ¶ 1.l; HE 1, HE 2) 
                                            
2 On June 15, 2010, Applicant provided brief descriptions of each offense listed in this section to 
an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. This OPM personal subject interview is the 
source for the facts in this section, unless stated otherwise. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In May 2005, the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with Theft of 
Property Valued at $300 and Under and Criminal Damage to Property. (Tr. 38-39; SOR 
¶ 1.m; HE 1, HE 2; GE 8) Applicant’s vehicle was towed to an impound lot. Applicant 
went to the lot and drove his vehicle out of the lot without paying the fees. He struck and 
damaged the fence of the impound lot when he removed his vehicle. The charge was 
eventually dismissed after he paid the owner of the lot $1,000 in restitution. (Tr. 39) 
 
In June 2006, the police arrested Applicant and cited him for Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol and Fleeing or Attempting to Elude Peace Officer. (Tr. 41; SOR ¶ 
1.o; HE 1, HE 2) A police officer told Applicant not to leave a parking lot, and when the 
police officer went around a corner, Applicant drove away. (Tr. 41-42) In December 
2006, the police arrested Applicant and cited him for Driving the Wrong Way, No Valid 
Proof of Insurance, and Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol. (Tr. 39-41; SOR ¶ 1.p; 
HE 1, HE 2) Applicant refused a breath or blood alcohol test (BAT). (Tr. 40-41) The 
court placed Applicant on 12 months court supervision and ordered him to participate in 
alcohol assessment and treatment. (SOR ¶ 1.p; HE 1, HE 2)  
 
In December 2007, the police cited Applicant for Speeding. (SOR ¶ 1.q; HE 1, 
HE 2) In July 2008, the police arrested Applicant for Fleeing from a Peace Officer. (Tr. 
43; SOR ¶ 1.r; HE 1, HE 2) Applicant thought the July 2008 offense might be related to 
an offense about two years previously, or possibly it was a duplication of a previous 
offense. (Tr. 44)  
 
In September 2008, the police charged Applicant with Driving with a Suspended 
or Revoked Driver’s License. (Tr. 44; SOR ¶ 1.s; HE 1, HE 2)  
 
On May 17, 2010, Applicant completed his SF 86 and omitted information about 
his criminal arrests, charges, and one alcohol-related arrest, as discussed in the next 
section. SOR ¶ 2.b indicates these omissions violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001, the false 
statement statute.  
 
In August 2010, the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with 
Unauthorized Certificate Original Sale Title, a felony-level offense, and Aiding, Abetting, 
or Permitting Possession of an Unauthorized Title or License Plate. (Tr. 46-47; SOR ¶ 
1.t; HE 1, HE 2) He did not report this arrest to his security officer or reveal it to his 
employer. (Tr. 47) He pleaded guilty and received a fine, which he paid. (Tr. 49) 
 
Appellant agreed that in each instance where he paid a fine, he also had a 
conviction. (Tr. 49) He did not allege any instances of deferred adjudication. (Tr. 49)  
 
Falsification of SF 86 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.u, 1.v, 1.w, and 2.b list three omissions relating to Section 22, “Your 
Police Record” of his May 17, 2010 SF 86. Section 22 states: 
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been “sealed” or otherwise stricken from the court record. The 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions under the 
Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 2l U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607.  
 
Sections 22.b, 22.c, and 22.e ask: 
 
b. Have you ever been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or 
any other type of law enforcement officer? 
 
c. Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense? (Include those 
under Uniform Code of Military Justice.) 
 
e. Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or 
drugs? 
 
Applicant answered, “Yes” and disclosed that he was arrested for DUI in June 
2006 and December 2006. He said the June 2006 DUI resulted in a guilty plea to a 
lesser charge3 and the December 2006 DUI was dismissed.4
 
 However, he deliberately 
omitted the following six arrests, charges, and one alcohol-related citation: 
(1) In August 1998, the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with 
Tampering with Motor Vehicle or Airplane, a Felony. (SOR ¶ 1.g; HE 1, HE 2)  
 
(2) In September 1998, the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with 
Theft or Unauthorized Control Over Property Valued at Over $300 and Under $10,000 
and Knowingly Damage to Property Over $300, Possession of Stolen Property, and 
Possession of Burglary Tools, a felony. (SOR ¶ 1.h; HE 1, HE 2)  
 
(3) In December 2003, Applicant was charged with Sexual Battery; however, the 
charge was reduced to Battery and Drunk in Public. (SOR ¶ 1.j; HE 1, HE 2) 
 
(4) In April 2004, the police arrested Applicant for Petty Larceny. (SOR ¶ 1.k; HE 
1, HE 2)  
 
(5) In July 2004, the police cited Applicant for Transportation or Carry Alcohol 
Liquor as a Vehicle Driver. (SOR ¶ 1.l; HE 1, HE 2) 
 
(6) In May 2005, the police arrested Applicant for Theft of Property Valued at 
$300 and Under and Criminal Damage to Property. (SOR ¶ 1.m; HE 1, HE 2)  
                                            
3 On June 15, 2010, he told an OPM investigator that he pleaded guilty to the June 2006 DUI 
offense and received a $500 fine. He did not indicate the offense he pleaded guilty to. He was on 
probation for one year.    
 
4 On June 15, 2010, he told an OPM investigator that he pleaded guilty to the December 2006 
DUI charge and received a $3,000 fine.  He was on probation for one year, and was required to attend 
classes about alcohol consumption.   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant explained that his omissions on his May 17, 2010 SF 86 were because 
“I’ve been in a lot of trouble and I simply did not remember every single thing.” (Tr. 45) 
He acknowledged a history of criminal activity; however, he argued that he had 
changed. He was married in 2011, had matured, had taken responsibility for his 
conduct, and had learned from his mistakes. (Tr. 50) He requested an opportunity to 
prove he should be entrusted with access to classified information. (Tr. 55)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and J (criminal conduct).  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
All five conditions apply. In 1998, Applicant had two felony-level arrests. In 
December 2003, he was charged with Sexual Battery. In 2004, he was charged with two 
misdemeanors. In 2005, he was charged with one misdemeanor. In June 2006 and 
December 2006, he was charged with DUI and other driving-related offenses. In August 
2010, he was charged with a felony. He admitted the underlying conduct to support the 
charges.  
 
When Applicant completed his May 17, 2010 SF 86, he disclosed two DUIs. 
However, he deliberately omitted six arrests, charges, and one alcohol-related citation. 
His statement that he did not remember “every single thing” is credible because of the 
sheer number of citations and arrests; however, his failure to disclose more of the 
offenses, especially the felonies, was intentional.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(g) do not apply to a sufficient degree to 
mitigate any SOR allegations. AG ¶ 17(c) applies to the information in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.f and 1.i. This series of traffic-related offenses is either pre-Navy service or 
more than 10 years ago. These specific offenses no longer cast doubt on Applicant’s 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 17(f) applies to SOR ¶ 1.r. Applicant believed that this offense 
might be a duplication.   
 
Applicant’s intentional omissions of required information on his 2010 SF 86 about 
his arrests, felony-level charges, and alcohol-related charges are not mitigated. He was 
not credible at his hearing about why he did not disclose this information. No one misled 
him into thinking this information should not be reported on his SF 86. The questions 
are clear, and his education level, current employment, and Navy experience show that 
he is an intelligent person. He did not claim that he misunderstood the question or that 
he failed to recognize the legal implications of his arrests and charges. His false 
statements on his SF 86 are serious and relatively recent. Personal conduct concerns 
are not mitigated.   
 
Criminal conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. In 1998, Applicant had two felony-level arrests. In 
December 2003, he was charged with Sexual Battery. In 2004, he was charged with two 
misdemeanors. In 2005, he was charged with one misdemeanor. In June 2006 and 
December 2006, he was charged with DUI and other driving-related offenses. In August 
2010, he was charged with a felony. Although his Sexual Battery offense was pleaded 
down from a felony to a misdemeanor, and one misdemeanor was dismissed, he 
admitted the underlying conduct to support the charges.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Appellant committed approximately 
nine criminal offenses beginning in 1998, and his most recent criminal offense occurred 
in August 2010. He violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001 when he intentionally omitted criminal-
offense information from his May 17, 2010 SF 86. He accepted some responsibility for 
his misconduct. He married in 2011, has matured, and learned from his mistakes; 
however, more time is necessary without criminal offenses before his criminal conduct 
will be fully mitigated.  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his access to classified information. He is a 31-year-old field service 
engineer for a defense contractor. He has held this position for three years, and there 
are no allegations of security violations. He served in the Navy from December 1998 to 
January 2003. He left active duty as a Petty Officer Third Class (E-4), and he received 
an honorable discharge. In 2007, he earned a bachelor’s degree in automotive 
technology. In November 2011, he married. There is every indication that he is loyal to 
the United States and his employer. I give Applicant substantial credit for addressing the 
allegations at his hearing. He has matured, and learned from his mistakes. These 
factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial.5
                                            
5 The SOR did not allege Applicant lied to the police or the OPM investigator, that he failed to 
disclose his most recent arrest to his security manager or employer, and that the disposition information 
on his May 17, 2010 SF 86 concerning his DUIs was incorrect or incomplete. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in 
an SOR may be considered stating:  
 He committed approximately nine criminal offenses beginning in 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
1998, and his most recent criminal offense occurred in August 2010. He violated 18 
U.S.C. § 1001 when he intentionally omitted criminal-offense information from his May 
17, 2010 SF 86. He has not mitigated his deliberate and intentional falsification of his 
2010 SF 86. He knew he should have disclosed his felony-level arrests and charges 
and his alcohol-related offense on his SF 86, and he chose not to do so.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude personal conduct and 
criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j through 1.m:  Against Applicant  
 Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.o through 1.q:  Against Applicant  
 Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.s through 1.w:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                            
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have not considered the non-SOR allegations for any purpose as this information is 
unnecessary to resolve the allegations against Applicant. 
