 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-02308 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ross R. Pesek, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 24, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On January 31, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 15, 2011. He answered 
the SOR in writing on March 22, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 14, 2011, 
and I received the case assignment on June 30, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on September 21, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 
12, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through D without objection. 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 19, 2011. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan. (Tr. at 10-12.) The request and the attached 
documents are included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 3. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.1
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c of the SOR. He 
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
Applicant is 47 years old. He is married and has five children, including the 
youngest, who was born in the United States and attends kindergarten. Applicant 
worked as a meat packer for four years and then at a large department store for four 
years. Since 2006 he works as a recruiter for a defense contractor that hires linguists. 
Applicant owns a home in the United States and has a mortgage with a U.S. bank.  
Applicant’s eldest son attended college until he needed to work to obtain money for 
tuition and now works as a defense contractor overseas. His second son works in the 
same capacity. His daughter attends college. His fourth and fifth children attend local 
schools in the United States. There is no derogatory information in the record 
concerning Applicant’s police or financial records. He has never been fired from a job. 
He has never been arrested. Applicant has never used illegal drugs or been involved in 
an alcohol-related incident. (Tr. 19-23, 26-30, 57, 58; Exhibits 1 and 2) 
 
Applicant has an older brother, who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. The 
brother has eight children and is unemployed. He lost his carpet business when the 
Taliban took control. Applicant would like to send him some money to help him, but is 
unable to do so because Applicant has a mortgage and five children and wife to 
support. Applicant has never met his brother’s wife and does not know their children. 
Applicant’s brother calls him once or twice a year to talk about family matters. (Tr. 30-
32, 52-56, 71) 
 
Applicant’s one sister lives in the Netherlands. She has lived there for 20 years, 
but has not become a citizen because she has difficulty learning the language and 
passing that part of the citizenship test. (Tr. 58; Exhibit 1) 
                                                          
1 Pakistan was not raised as a security risk, nor were any documents for administrative notice offered by the 
government concerning Pakistan. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant met his wife in Pakistan in 1985 when he arrived there as a refugee. 
She fled to Pakistan from Afghanistan with her family in the early 1980s. Applicant and 
his wife were married in 1986 and had four children before winning the immigration 
lottery and coming to the United States in 1996. His wife and children became U.S. 
citizens in 2002. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2005 after filing his application in 
2002. Applicant’s citizenship application was not approved with his wife’s because he 
received a child neglect ticket for leaving a sick child at home when he had to take his 
wife to work one day. (Tr. 41, 42, 47, 49-51, 70, 73; Exhibits 1 and 2)  
 
 Applicant’s wife has nine siblings consisting of five brothers and four sisters. 
They all live in Pakistan where they went as refugees with her parents in the early 
1980s. Her father is a veterinarian and lives in the United States, as does her mother. 
He works as a meat packer and saved his money to purchase the house in which they 
live with four of their children in the United States (two of Applicant’s brothers-in-law and 
two of his sisters-in-law are under the age of 19 years.). The parents-in-law became 
U.S. citizens and Applicant sponsored them in that effort. His parents-in-law were 
Afghanistan citizens, never Pakistani citizens as alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s in-laws 
attend high school in the same city in which Applicant lives. Three sisters-in-law and two 
brothers-in-law live in Pakistan as Afghanistan refugees. Of these two brothers-in-law 
Applicant’s wife’s oldest brother is the only one married. The two brothers-in-law are 
engineers living in Pakistan. These siblings would like to immigrate to the United States 
and the necessary documents are pending approval by the U.S. Government. 
Applicant’s Answer denied his five brothers-in-law and five sisters-in-law were citizens 
and residents of Pakistan because they are Afghanistan citizens and refugees living in 
Pakistan. (Tr. 33-46, 48; Exhibits 1 and D)  
 
 Applicant does not have contact with anyone in Pakistan or Afghanistan since he 
came to the United States. His wife speaks only to her family members if they contact 
her parents and the family members are present. (Tr. 63, 64) 
 
 Applicant went to Afghanistan in 2006. He had an interim security clearance 
during that 18-day trip as part of a four-month period. Someone accused him of leaving 
the air force base without permission. Applicant was later exonerated and his accuser 
fired. (Tr. 38, 39, 65, 76; Exhibit 2) 
 
 None of Applicant’s relatives or his wife’s siblings served in the Afghanistan or 
Pakistan military. No relative worked for either government. (Tr. 48) 
 
 When Applicant came to the United States he used an Afghanistan passport he 
obtained in Pakistan at the Afghanistan consulate. That passport was valid for one year, 
expiring in 1997. He shredded that passport in 2002 when he applied for U.S. 
citizenship. Applicant’s wife witnessed the destruction of that expired passport. (Tr. 68-
70)  
 
 Applicant’s two oldest sons submitted letters on behalf of their father. They attest 
to his loyalty to the United States, his honesty and integrity, and his hard work. The 
 
4 
 
 
recruiting manager for Applicant’s employer submitted a letter stating Applicant has 
worked for the company for four years. He is described as intelligent and motivated. His 
recruitment results during the past four years have been “prestigious.” The supervisor 
also describes Applicant as loyal, having a positive attitude, an energetic personality, 
and constantly striving for excellence in his recruitment efforts. (Exhibits A to C) 
   
Afghanistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Afghanistan Hearing 
Exhibits.  Afghanistan is a country in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east 
and the south.  Iran borders it on the west and Russia in the north.  It is a rugged and 
mountainous country which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people. Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a 
turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979.  After an 
Accord was reached in 1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued 
among the various ethnic, clan and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban 
rose to power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive 
social, political, and religious policies. In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition 
partners led military operations in the country after the September 11, 2001 attacks 
against the United States by persons affiliated with the Taliban and trained in 
Afghanistan. Those attacks forced the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The 
new democratic Government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that 
election, terrorists and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant. 
According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to 
plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel 
warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. 
(Exhibit 3)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. (AG ¶ 2(a)) The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three guideline subsections apply: 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 2
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s one brother lives in Afghanistan with his wife and eight children. 
Applicant’s wife has nine siblings, four of whom reside in the United States and are 
teenagers. Five others live in Pakistan as refugees. Applicant’s father and mother-in-law 
live in the United States and are naturalized U.S. citizens. Applicant has contact with 
them because they live in the same city he does. His wife’s siblings in Pakistan create a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because 
Applicant lives with his wife and three children in their home (the older two sons work 
overseas for a defense contractor and are not home at present). Applicant and his wife 
helped her parents and four siblings come to the United States and are trying to arrange 
the immigration of her remaining siblings. Therefore, these three conditions apply on the 
facts.  
 
 None of Applicant’s family members have positions in which they could otherwise 
benefit from his access to sensitive information or technology. However, under any of 
these disqualifying condition, security concerns in this case could arise in connection 
with the potential that hostile forces might seek protected information from Applicant by 
threatening harm to his family members in Afghanistan.  
 
 Afghanistan is a dangerous location. The Taliban rebels fight the Afghan 
government, and the U.S. military stationed there to assist that elected government. 
Attacks on U.S. government facilities and commercial properties, suicide bombers, and 
other terrorist acts occur around the country on a daily basis. The U.S. State 
Department issued warnings to travelers about going to Afghanistan. Applicant’s familial 
relationships must be examined in that context.  
 
                                                          
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant has 
contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of these disqualifying conditions, 
and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the 
resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests are such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Three mitigating conditions apply. Applicant is a recruiter of linguists. His brother 
and he rarely have contact each year. No money is sent to the brother because 
Applicant cannot afford to help his sibling. Applicant’s relationship with his older brother 
is so tangential since 1985 when Applicant departed Afghanistan that it is unlikely 
Applicant would be placed in a position to choose between his brother and the interests 
of the United States. The current positions and activities of Applicant’s wife’s family 
members in Pakistan and Applicant’s brother in Afghanistan do not involve the 
government or military and they would have no interest in acquiring protected 
information. Only their physical presence creates the potential that their interests could 
be threatened to the point that Applicant would confront a choice between their interest 
and those of the United States. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.   
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States and is gainfully employed. His 
mortgage is held by a local bank where he lives. His two youngest children attend U.S. 
schools. Applicant’s two oldest children work as employees of U.S. defense contractors 
overseas. Applicant fled Afghanistan in 1985 and has returned once with his 
employment as a recruiter for an 18-day period several years ago. Applicant wants his 
wife’s family to come to the United States. He helped her parents and four siblings 
immigrate. Applicant has strong ties to the United States as shown by his preference for 
it in his actions from 1996 to the present day. He and his immediate family became U.S. 
citizens between 2002 and 2005. Applicant has no obligation, financial or otherwise, to 
Afghanistan, from which he has been absent for 26 years. There is no evidence in the 
record that Applicant owns property in Afghanistan or has foreign bank accounts. He will 
resolve any conflict in favor of the United States based on his actions to date. AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies.  
 
Applicant does not maintain ongoing, communication with his brother and his 
wife’s siblings in Pakistan. Hence, AG ¶ 8(c) applies, as those contacts are not frequent 
and are casual.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or 
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Two circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
 
9 
 
 
human rights abuses in Afghanistan. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists 
are hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists and 
friendly governments could attempt to use Applicant’s one brother and his family living 
in Afghanistan to obtain such information. Second, some of his wife’s family is located in 
Pakistan as refugees.  
 
 Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 15 years, and 
has been a naturalized citizen for almost five years. His spouse and children are U.S. 
citizens. His parents-in-law and four of their children are naturalized U.S. citizens and 
residents. Out of his sense of patriotism for the United States in its endeavors in 
Afghanistan, he worked for a defense contractor as a recruiter of translators for the U.S. 
military. His two sons work as translators overseas for the U.S. military. His ties to the 
United States, which he refers to as his country, are much stronger than his ties to his 
siblings or families living in Afghanistan and Pakistan. There is no evidence he has ever 
taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his 
loyalty to the United States seriously, and he has worked diligently and impressively for 
the past few years since he obtained his job in an important capacity for the U.S. 
military efforts. His supervisors and colleagues assess him as loyal, trustworthy, 
conscientious, and responsible, giving him excellent evaluations and praising his 
dedication to the cause of freedom in Afghanistan. (Exhibits A to C) He is a good family 
member and U.S. citizen. After leaving Afghanistan in 1985, he never returned until he 
worked with the U.S. forces in 2006.  
 
 No witnesses recommended denial of Applicant’s security clearance. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record. There is evidence that he has 
successfully worked in high-risk circumstances and made significant contributions to the 
United States in its efforts in Afghanistan. He credibly demonstrated his allegiance to 
the United States. Applicant held an interim security clearance during his 2006 trip to 
Afghanistan without any indication that he breached security policies or procedures.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, including Applicant’s commendable 
performance as recruiter for his current employer and a short experience as a translator 
and advisor in Afghanistan in 2006, I conclude Applicant has fully mitigated the security 
concerns pertaining to foreign influence.3
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves no doubt 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
                                                          
3I conclude that the whole-person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security clearance. 
Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions articulated under AG ¶ 8 
do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole-person analysis standing alone is sufficient 
to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
10 
 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence. I 
conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
