1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-08517
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 18, 2010. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 6, 2011, detailing security concerns
under Guideline F, financial considerations, that provided the basis for its preliminary
decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
Applicant received the SOR on June 16, 2011. He answered the SOR on June
21, 2011. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received
the request, and Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 27, 2011. I
received the case assignment on August 3, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on
October 4, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 26, 2011. The
Government offered exhibits marked as GE 1 through GE 5, which were received and
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any
exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2011. I held the
record open until November 28, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional matters.
Applicant timely submitted AE A through AE E, which have been marked and admitted
without objection. The record closed on November 28, 2011. After the close of the
record, Applicant’s project manager forwarded an e-mail to Department Counsel,
addressing Applicant’s request for a copy of his performance review. The project
manager advised that Applicant’s review had been requested, but had not been
received. She then provided a brief statement about his performance. The Government
did not object to the admission of this document as AE F. This exhibit is admitted into
evidence. 
Procedural Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice less than 15 days before the hearing. (Tr.
8.) I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the notice
15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15-day notice.
(Id.) 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and
1.e of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d of the SOR.  After a complete and1
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of
fact.  
Applicant, who is 36 years old, works as a security officer for a Department of
Defense contractor. He began his current employment in April 2010. His project
GE 1; Tr. 16, 32.2
GE 1; Tr. 15, 22.3
Tr. 22-23, 30-31, 33.4
AE D.5
3
manager describes him as a dependable employee, who often works overtime.
Applicant’s employer named him Officer of the Year in 2010. He also worked as a
security officer at the same facility for a prior company from 2002 until 2009. From July
2009 until April 2010, Applicant did not work, by his own choice, and did not receive
unemployment benefits.2
Applicant married in 2004 and he and his wife separated in 2007. They are not
divorced. Applicant has two children. His son is 13 and his daughter is 11. His children
do not live with him. He pays $470 a month in child support and is current on his child
support payments.3
Applicant lives with his mother and younger brother. He pays his mother $250 a
month towards rent and food, plus $50 a month toward utilities. He does not own a car;
instead, he uses public transportation or rides his bicycle. His mother has cable and
internet services at home, but he does not have his own cable and internet accounts.
He does not have credit cards or a cell phone. His monthly transportation costs average
approximately $20. He recently had surgery and has paid some medical bills related to
his treatment. He did not provide copies of any of his payments. While he did not
mention monthly miscellaneous expenses, I estimate expenses such as clothing,
haircuts, or medical bills, at $100. His total monthly expenses total approximately $900.4
Applicant provided a copy of his earnings statements from May 6, 2011 through
October 20, 2011. He hourly wage is $10.52 and his monthly gross income is $1,683.
His monthly net pay is $1,158. He occasionally works overtime and is paid $15.78 an
hour when he does. His net income increases between $30 and $60 a month with his
overtime work. After he pays his monthly expenses, Applicant has between $260 and
$320 a month in available funds to pay his debts.5
The SOR identified five purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by
credit reports from 2010 and 2011, totaling approximately $13,281.  Some accounts
have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents. Other
accounts are referenced repeatedly in both credit reports, in many instances duplicating
other accounts listed, either under the same creditor or collection agency name or under
a different creditor or collection agency name. Some accounts are identified by
complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in
some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating other digits.
At the hearing, Department Counsel agreed that the debt listed in SOR
allegations 1.d and 1.e are the same. The creditor in allegation 1.e is collecting the $272
The July 19, 2011 credit report shows that the debt owed has been reduced by $850. GE 5.6
GE 3-GE 5; AE D; AE E; Tr. 17-18, 27-28.7
GE 5; Tr. 17-18, 27-28.8
Tr. 24, 26.9
4
debt for the creditor in allegation 1.d, which Applicant denied. Allegation 1.d is found in
favor of Applicant.
Applicant denied owing the student loans in SOR allegations 1.a ($4,377) and 1.b
($2,001). He indicated that he paid one loan in full through a deduction from his pay and
that he was working on a resolution of the second loan. He provided a statement from
the collection agent for one student loan, which reflects that he has made monthly
payments on a loan debt of $4,194 since November 2, 2010. As of November 2, 2011,
he has paid $3,110 on his debt. His payments reduced the principal by $2,053 and the
collection costs by $575.  His payments also included $482 in interest payments. He still6
owes approximately $1,565 on this debt. His monthly payments vary, but at a minimum,
he pays $209 each month on this debt. His payments are shown on his wage
statement. The debt should be resolved in less than one year. His payments relate to
the debt in SOR allegation 1.a.7
As for his second student loan, Applicant stated that he had received a letter
from the creditor asking how he wished to pay his debt. The creditor gave him the
option of using his tax refund or a garnishment of his salary. He had not yet decided
which option he would chose, but he is leaning towards using his tax refund to pay this
debt. The July 19, 2011 credit report reflects that this debt has been reduced by $400.
The source of the payments is unknown, but the payment supports his position that he
has paid on his student loans.8
The $6,359 in SOR allegation 1.c and the $272 debt in SOR allegation 1.e
remain unpaid. Applicant does not have a definitive plan to pay these debts. The July
19, 2011 credit report indicates that both debts have a zero balance because the debts
have been transferred or sold. The credit reports shows a date of last activity on the
largest debt of 2006 and the smaller debt of 2005. The new creditor for the $272 debt is
the creditor identified in allegation 1.e. The owner of the $6,359 debt is unknown,
making it difficult for him to develop a payment plan until the new owner is identified.
The record contains no other negative information about Applicant. He works
regularly, and there is no evidence of misconduct at work. Applicant has not received
any financial counseling recently, but he met with a financial counselor after he and his
wife separated in 2007.  This counselor suggested he consolidate his debts, which he
did. He paid his debts for a time.9
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
6
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Appellant developed financial problems when he and his wife separated in 2007.
He also did not pay his debts when he was not working. Some of the debts have not
been resolved. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.    
While involuntary unemployment is a factor beyond an individual’s control,
voluntary unemployment is not. Applicant stated that his nine months of unemployment
was his choice. Thus, AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.
Applicant has developed a repayment plan for his largest school loan and has
paid about 70 per cent of this debt. He has also paid a portion of the smaller school
7
debt. He has tentatively decided to use his tax refund to pay this debt. Applicant is
resolving two SOR debts. AG ¶ 20(c) applies to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 200). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
He cannot repay the largest debt until the current owner of the debt is identified.10
8
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these
problems first began, Applicant had recently separated from his wife. His income alone
was insufficient to pay all his debts at the time of his separation. He has not developed
any type of plan to resolve his largest or smallest debt, even though he has
approximately $250 a month available to resolve these debts, particularly the $272 debt.
He is paying or working on a resolution of his school debts, which constitute 50 per cent
of the SOR debts. He pays his child support every month. He lives with his mother and
brother. He contributes to household expenses every month. He does not own a car, a
cell phone, or credit cards. He rides his bike or uses public transportation to get to work
or other activities. He lives very frugally and within his monthly income. He is well-
respected at his job and was named Officer of the Year in 2010. He has established a
partial track record for debt resolution and a track record for living within his monthly
income. When he was unemployed, he did not purchase items on credit, which would
have incurred unnecessary debt. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts
are paid: it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to
hold a security clearance. While some debts remain unpaid,  they are insufficient to10
raise security concerns because he has not incurred any unpaid debt since his
separation more than four years ago nor has he chosen an extravagant lifestyle. (See
AG & 2(a)(1).)
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
9
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
