 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05580 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 22, 2010, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 11, 2011, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2001. He requested that his case be 
determined on the written record. The Government compiled its File of Relevant 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
Material (FORM) on June 20, 2011. The FORM contained documents identified as 
Items 1 through 9. By letter dated July 29, 2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM 
to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 
30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on August 10, 2011. His response was 
due on September 9, 2011. Applicant did not submit additional information or file 
objections to the FORM within the required time period. On October 7, 2011, the case 
was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 12 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.l.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
all allegations. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government. 
The record evidence includes Applicant’s February 22, 2010 e-QIP; official investigation 
and agency records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 and Applicant’s 
credit reports of March 9, 2011 and March 4, 2010. (See Items 5 through 9.) 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old, married, and the father of three children. He is 
employed by a federal contractor as an aircraft mechanic-electrician. He has worked for 
his present employer since August 2009. He seeks a security clearance for the first 
time. (Item 5.) 
 
 On his e-QIP, Applicant reported a record of steady employment from 2001 to 
the present. His e-QIP indicates that from March 2001 until May 2003, he worked full-
time as an order picker. From May 2003 until January 2004, he was employed part-time 
in sales. From January 2004 until July 2009, he worked full-time as a service technician. 
He began his present full-time employment in August 2009. (Item 5.) 
 
 However, in his March 29, 2010, interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant 
reported that he was unemployed for all of 2004 while attending a technical college. He 
told the investigator that he fell behind in paying his debts during this time, and he 
acknowledged that some of the debts he incurred in 2004 remained unsatisfied. He also 
asserted that he was currently living within his means and had sufficient financial 
resources to timely satisfy his rent, utilities, and car payments. (Item 7.) 
  
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$30,279. The debts include three medical debts in collection status, one for $96, one for 
$431, and one for $182 (SOR ¶¶ 1.h., 1.k., and 1.l.). The SOR also alleges that 
Applicant is responsible for four additional debts in collection status: SOR ¶¶ 1.d. 
 
1Applicant was interviewed about his financial issues by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) on March 29, 2010. On April 11, 2011, after reviewing the investigator’s 
report of the interview, Applicant signed a statement affirming that the investigator’s report accurately 
reflected his March 29, 2010 interview. (Item 7.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
($581), 1.f. ($711), 1.i. ($381), and 1.j. ($3,795). Additionally, Applicant owes four debts 
in charged-off status: SOR ¶¶ 1.a. ($8,672), 1.b. ($8,120), 1.c. ($3,401), and 1.g. 
($909). The SOR also alleged Applicant also was 180 days or more past due on a 
$3,000 student loan account (SOR ¶ 1.e. (Item 1.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant asserted that he had disputed the 
debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.g. However, he provided no 
documentation to corroborate that he had disputed those debts. (Item 6.) 
 
 In his response, Applicant also provided a credit report dated March 16, 2011, 
and he reported that the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.h., 1.i., 1.k., and 1.l. were no longer 
listed on the credit report. He stated that he need more time to address the delinquent 
accounts identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.j. He asserted that he had made payments on 
his student loan account (SOR ¶ 1.e.), and it was no longer in default. He provided 
documentation to corroborate that he did not owe past due amounts on his student loan 
account and the loan was in repayment status. (Item 6.) He failed to provide 
documentation establishing that he had made payments on any other debts alleged in 
the SOR. He stated that he needed more time and more income to satisfy his debts, but 
he intended, at some unspecified time in the future, to satisfy his delinquent debts (Item 
6.) 
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement in response to DOHA 
interrogatories. The statement showed that Applicant had a negative monthly net 
remainder of $35, and he had no scheduled payments on the delinquent debts alleged 
on the SOR. (Item 6.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant asserted that he and his wife had 
“been working with a credit advocate for about a year now to get our credit issues 
resolved.” However, he did not provide documentation to corroborate that he had 
received consumer credit counseling. (Item 6.)   
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
 
4 
 
 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
Applicant owes approximately $30,279 in delinquent debts. While he asserts that 
he was unemployed seven years ago, in 2004, he appears to have had steady 
employment since 2005, and he has worked for his present employer since August 
2009. However, with the exception of providing information on the repayment status of 
his student loan debt, he has failed to demonstrate that he has paid his 11 other 
delinquent debts or has negotiated payment plans with his creditors. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
 
6 
 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. Eleven of the 12 debts 
alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. He has provided no documentation to establish 
that he has made arrangements to pay or otherwise satisfy those 11 financial 
delinquencies. His financial delinquencies are ongoing and are likely to recur. Applicant 
intends to resolve his debts at some unspecified future time. In determining an 
individual's security worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an 
applicant might resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case 
No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  
 
Applicant claimed that his delinquent debt arose when he was unemployed in 
2004. However, he failed to provide documentation to corroborate his claim. Moreover, 
he provided no documentation that he informed his creditors of his financial hardship 
and requested forbearance or reduced payment arrangements. While Applicant may 
have been unable to control the circumstances that led to his unemployment, he failed 
to show that he acted reasonably under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant has been employed at his current position since August 2009. His 
personal financial statement shows that he lacks sufficient funds to meet his monthly 
living expenses and has no money available to pay his delinquent debts. His debts, 
even relatively small debts of $96 and $182, remain unresolved. While he claimed that 
he had disputed some of his delinquent debts, he failed to provide documentation to 
corroborate his claim. Additionally, Applicant failed to demonstrate that he made good- 
faith efforts to satisfy his delinquent debts. He has not demonstrated that he has had 
financial counseling, and there is no evidence that his financial situation is under 
control. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in 
mitigation in Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
7 
 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. He has had 
difficulties in managing his finances and paying his delinquent debts. However, he took 
no action to inform his creditors his financial problems and to arrange payment plans. In 
2004, he was unemployed and unable to pay his debts. He merits credit for establishing 
a plan to bring his delinquent student loan out of default and into repayment status. 
However, he has not demonstrated that he has taken action to pay the 11 other 
delinquent debts alleged on the SOR. He has had a steady job since August 2009, and 
yet he has taken no action to satisfy even the smallest debt alleged on the SOR. He 
says he will pay his debts in the future, but he provides no specific plan for doing so.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.- 1.d.:     Against Applicant 
   
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.l.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
