 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01814 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 8, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on September 21, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on October 12, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through J at 
the hearing. The exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE K and L 
that were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum 
was marked HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 20, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel stated that the Guideline E allegations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 
2.b) had been withdrawn by the Government on September 14, 2011. Since the SOR 
still contains those allegations, I will enter findings in favor of Applicant on those 
allegations. Additionally, during the course of the hearing Department Counsel moved to 
amend the SOR to withdraw various allegations under Guideline F. Specifically, he 
moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.k – 1.r, and 1.u. I granted the motion; however, to 
insure clarity of the results, I will also enter findings in favor of the Applicant on those 
allegations.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted some allegations and denied others. Her admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, testimony and admitted 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a 
defense contractor. She is married. She has four children from earlier relationships. She 
receives $2,100 monthly child support payments. She is working toward a bachelor’s 
degree. She served in the Army for 13 years. She held a top secret clearance at that 
time. She was separated for medical reasons in 2006. She had a brief period of 
unemployment from July to August 2007. She has worked for her current defense 
contractor-employer since January 2009.2  
 
 The SOR (non-withdrawn allegations) alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $28,810. The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on July 31, 
2010, February 7, 2011, and May 24, 2011.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial troubles are attributed to raising her children, mostly as a 
single parent without support from the children’s fathers. It was only recently, in January 
2011, that she began receiving child support for two of her children. She currently 
makes about $82,000 as a gross salary. Her husband makes $48,000. They do not 
have any active credit cards. Her over-all financial income and expense statement 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15, 26-27, 69, 71. 
 
2 Tr. at 7, 28-29, 41-44, 76; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 3-5. 
 
 
3 
 
shows that she has a $1,200 surplus at the end of the month after paying her 
expenses.4 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a debt from an unexpired lease. She provided 
proof that the debt was settled and resolved. The debt at SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection for a 
cable debt. She provided proof of an on-going payment plan to resolve this debt. The 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c is a school loan debt for $6,226 that she incurred when she 
had to withdraw from classes because of her pregnancy. Her GI Bill entitlement does 
not pay for classes not completed. She recently set up a payment plan for this debt 
whereby she would pay $200 monthly until the debt is solved, however, she did not 
provide any proof of payments under the plan. She incurred the debt at SOR ¶ 1.d for 
$6,598 when she was in the Army. This debt is still unresolved. She provided proof that 
the $109 debt at SOR ¶ 1.e was paid. The $1,789 debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.f is a credit 
card account that she used while in the Army. This debt is unresolved. She claims the 
debt at SOR ¶ 1.g for $207 does not appear on any credit reports, but the debt is 
reflected in the GE 3 at p. 22 (at hand-numbered p. 258).5    
 The tax debt Applicant owes relates back to her Army days. She failed to pay 
enough withholding when she left the Army for tax year 2005. The debt at SOR ¶ 1.i is 
$6,480. She talked with the IRS and claims to have set up a payment plan to resolve 
the debt by paying $400 a month, however, no documentation of payment was 
provided. This debt is unresolved. The alleged debt in SOR ¶ 1.j is collection account in 
the amount of $2,935 for child care services. She set up a payment plan for this debt 
and made two payments in September 2011 for a total of $404. She provided 
documented proof that the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.s and 1.t were paid.6  
 
 Applicant submitted several character letters from supervisors and colleagues 
who work with her in her current position. They describe Applicant as a professional 
who is reliable, trustworthy, and someone who is an asset to her organization. She did 
not present any evidence that she sought any form of financial counseling.7  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 43-44; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 45-52; GE 3; AE A-E, G.  
 
6 Tr. at 45-52; GE 3; AE A-G, I.  
 
7 AE J. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts including tax debts and 
credit card debts, and was unable or unwilling to satisfy her obligations. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Although some debts have been paid, Applicant still owes many of her debts, 
including the larger balance accounts. They are not infrequent and there is no evidence 
to support the assertion that they will not recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced a brief period of unemployment and was not receiving 
child support for two children for a considerable amount of time. These are conditions 
beyond her control. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, the 
Applicant must also act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to show 
that her actions were reasonable since the larger debts remain unpaid and it appears 
she has discretionary income to pay these debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant produced no evidence of receiving financial counseling. Although 
several debts are paid, and she has made installment payments on several more debts, 
the remaining debts remain unsettled and unresolved, including her tax debt and 
student loan debt. Therefore, her finances are not being resolved and are not under 
control. Her preliminary attempts to reach settlements with the IRS and her student loan 
creditor at this late date are insufficient to support a finding that she has made a good-
faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve her remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are 
only applicable to the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1., 1.e, 1.j, 1.s, and 1.t.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the character letters of support for Applicant. I also considered her 
period of unemployment for the period she was not receiving child support. I also found 
Applicant to be honest and candid about her finances. However, with resources 
available to her, she has done very little to resolve her debts. She only recently 
engaged her creditors in settlement negotiations. Her past financial track record reflects 
a troublesome financial history that causes me to question her ability to resolve her 
debts.  
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j - 1.u:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
