 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10276 
  ) 
  )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on August 23, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 4, 
2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 31, 2011, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on November 15, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 6, which were admitted into the record without objection. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called 
two witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A and B that were admitted into the record 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 23, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, but denied ¶¶ 
1.c and 1.e. He failed to admit or deny SOR ¶ 2.a, which will be treated as a denial. The 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor for about two 
years. He was married on November 30, 2010. This is his first marriage. He does not 
have any children. He received his GED (General Educational Development) degree 
and has completed two years of college. He has no military experience and does not 
currently hold a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) being arrested, charged and 
pleading guilty to felony counts of armed robbery in March 2004 (admitted); (2) being 
arrested for possession of marijuana in May 2002 (admitted); (3) being charged with 
selling-furnishing liquor to a minor in July 2003 (denied); (4) testing positive on a 
urinalysis test for opiates in April 2006 while he was in prison (admitted) and, (5) using 
marijuana, methamphetamine, cocaine, and LSD on a daily basis between 1999 and 
2003 (denied daily use of these drugs). This conduct is alleged under both criminal 
conduct (Guideline J) and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
  
 In September 2003, Applicant and two other people broke into the house of an 
acquaintance. He then proceeded to rob the acquaintance of money and drugs at 
gunpoint. Applicant was arrested and charged with numerous offenses including 
kidnapping, burglary, and armed robbery. During the course of the robbery, he pointed 
handguns at the victims. He ultimately pleaded guilty to armed robbery and the 
remaining charges were dropped. He was sentenced to prison for seven years. He 
served six of the seven years and was released early to serve probation for three years. 
He began his probation in October 2009 and was released early from probation in June 
2011, because of his good behavior. Applicant is no longer under any probation 
restrictions.2  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-5, 81; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 57-58; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2006, while in prison, Applicant tested positive on a random urinalysis for 
opiates. He admitted using his cellmate’s prescription medicine to relieve the pain he 
was experiencing due to shingles. No documentation was provided to support the 
shingles claim. He was administratively punished and lost 10 days of early release 
credit for this prison infraction. Applicant testified that his last drug use was the illegal 
use of his cellmate’s prescription drugs in 2006; however, his earlier statement to a 
defense investigator indicated his last use of drugs was in November 2009 with no 
further explanation.3  
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana, methamphetamine, cocaine, and LSD on a 
regular basis between 1999 and 2003. He also admitted his arrest for possession of 
marijuana in 2002. There is no evidence in the record to support the selling/furnishing 
liquor to a minor allegation and Applicant denies that allegation.4  
 
 Applicant presented testimony from both his wife and mother about the changes 
that he has made in his life. He also presented character evidence from friends, 
coworkers, and his probation officer about the positive changes they have seen in him. 
All thoroughly support Applicant and believe he is worthy of receiving a security 
clearance.5  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 81; GE 2, 5. 
 
4 GE 2; Answer. 
 
5 Tr. at 26-55; AE A-B. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant pled guilty to a felony count of armed robbery and served six years in 
prison for the offense. He also admitted to various drug use between 1999 and 2003, 
and illegal use of prescription drugs while in prison. I find that the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s criminal conviction is somewhat remote, but it was very serious. 
Additionally, he admitted to drug use in 2006 and 2009, which is much more recent. He 
has only been off supervised probation since June 2011. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient evidence that his reliability, trustworthiness and judgment is not in question 
based upon the nature of his previous offenses. Not enough time has passed to 
determine whether his rehabilitative efforts have succeeded. So, while some aspects of 
both mitigating conditions are present, on the whole Applicant has not presented 
sufficient evidence for either to completely apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information.  
Applicant’s criminal actions were thoroughly discussed under the criminal 
conduct analysis. His questionable judgment was apparent by his involvement in the 
 
6 
 
 
serious crime of armed robbery. He also showed a disregard for rules and regulations 
when he used unauthorized drugs while in prison. AG ¶ 16(c) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Although some time has passed, it is too soon to say whether Applicant’s 
criminal ways are unlikely to recur. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to 
establish his reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s 
current position, his early release from probation, and his supportive character 
evidence. However, I also considered that Applicant’s actions involved serious crimes 
for which he spent six years in prison. Although Applicant has made positive strides 
toward his rehabilitation, it is too early to determine whether those efforts will ultimately 
proof successful. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d -1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
