1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-10858
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns
generated by his delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on December
1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2011, admitting all of the allegations, and
requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 31, 2011. A notice of
hearing was issued on October 19, 2011, scheduling the case for November 9, 2011. I
2
held the hearing as scheduled, receiving eight Government exhibits, marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-8, and considering Applicant’s testimony. I also received a
chart from Department Counsel linking Applicant’s debts with the corresponding record
evidence. I marked this as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on
November 17, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old married man with two children, ages 12 and 3. He has
been married for a year, and was married once previously. The two children are from
prior relationships.
Applicant is a veteran of the U.S. Navy, where he served from 2001 through his
honorable discharge in 2007. He earned a bachelor’s degree in the field of secondary
education in 1996, and a master’s degree in information systems in 2010. (Tr. 15) He is
employed with a defense contractor as a computer hardware support technician. (Tr.
17)
Applicant has approximately $45,000 of delinquent debt, including approximately
$6,000 in delinquent child support as listed in subparagraph 1.a, and multiple credit card
accounts. Applicant contends his ex-girlfriend with whom he lived for four years
between 2004 and 2008, accrued the majority of these delinquencies, and that he was
unaware of her profligate spending because he spent much of his time during this
period deployed. (Tr. 21) He has not contacted any of the creditors in writing disputing
any of the delinquencies. (Tr. 34)
Applicant also contends his financial condition was aggravated when he quit his
job to relocate to another state in March 2008 and was unable to find employment. He
was subsequently unemployed for ten months. (Tr. 18)
Applicant owes the child support delinquency to his ex-girlfriend, the mother of
his youngest child. He has paid approximately $4,000 of this debt through an intercept
of his tax returns. (Tr. 19) He continues to make monthly payments through a wage
garnishment. (Tr. 19)
Applicant has not begun satisfying any of the other delinquencies. He knows that
he has monthly after-expense income to apply to these delinquencies, but “doesn’t
know which way to attack it.” (Tr. 23) 
Applicant attended credit counseling a few years ago, shortly after leaving the
Navy. (Tr. 34) He has not attended any credit counseling since relocating in mid-2008.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
3
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel . . .”. The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information (AG
¶ 18). Applicant’s financial struggles trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
4
Upon considering these mitigating conditions, I conclude none apply. Although
the accrual of these debts may have partially been outside of Applicant’s control, he has
neither organized a payment plan, nor begun making payments on any of them, except
a child support delinquency. Because he is satisfying the child support delinquency
through a combination of tax return intercepts and a wage garnishment, it has minimal
probative value with respect to his security clearance worthiness. Also, Applicant
contends his ex-girlfriend accrued several of these delinquencies without his knowledge,
but has not formally disputed any of them.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   
Applicant has made no effort to rectify the financial considerations security
concern. This is particularly troubling considering that Applicant acknowledged that he
has approximately $200 to $300 of after-expense monthly income which he could apply
to his delinquent debts. Upon considering this case in the context of the whole-person
concept, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial considerations security
concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.s: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
