                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10973 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
concerns. She has over $40,000 in delinquent debt and failed to establish that her 
financial situation is under control. She falsified her security clearance application (SCA) 
when she failed to disclose her delinquent debt. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Applicant submitted her response to the SOR on August 29, 2011 (Answer). 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
She admitted 10 of the 12 debts alleged in the SOR, denied falsifying her SCA, and 
requested a hearing.  
 
 On November 1, 2011, Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for December 12, 2011, via video 
teleconference.2 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel 
also submitted a demonstrative aid, setting forth each of the debts and their current 
status, which was marked and accepted into the record without objection as Hearing 
Exhibit III. Applicant appeared at the hearing and testified on her own behalf. She did 
not offer any exhibits and I kept the record open until December 27, 2011, to provide 
her the opportunity to submit matters for my review. She submitted Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AE) A and it was admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on December 20, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. Her mother is deceased and she divorced in 2004. She 
graduated high school in 1989 and then attended college. She studied accounting, but 
never completed the coursework necessary for a degree. She has primarily worked in 
the shipping industry and started working for DoD in 1997, as a contractor, supplying 
overseas military bases. She has never held a security clearance.3  
  
 Applicant’s financial troubles began in October 2006 when she was laid off by her 
former employer. She was unemployed until February 2008. Even after finding work, 
Applicant was making less than at her last job. She has been with her current employer 
since October 2009.4 She is a logistics manager, assuring “the end-to-end movement of 
cargo.”5 She testified that her current job was a “bump” in pay, and her current salary is 
between $75,000 and $80,000 per year.6 
 
 Applicant was involved in a serious auto accident a few days before starting her 
current job in October 2009. She has incurred a significant amount of medical expenses 
as a result of the accident, but it has all been paid for by insurance. None of the debts 
listed in the SOR relate to any medical bills or were a consequence of the accident. She 
is in the midst of litigation and plans to use the expected settlement proceeds to satisfy 
her past-due debts. Her personal-injury attorney also assists clients facing financial 
2 As a time-management tool, I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties to serve one 
another and me their anticipated exhibits prior to the hearing. See Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
3 Tr. at 26, 47-41, 79-81; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 26-28, 43-45; GE 1; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 47. 
 
6 Tr. at 46-47. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
problems. Last year, Applicant asked her attorney to assist her in consolidating her 
past-due debts.7 Applicant believes her attorney is “dragging his feet” because the 
attorney has suggested that revealing her financial situation might “hurt” her personal 
injury case.8 She plans to hire another attorney to help her address her debts if her 
current counsel does not help her in the near future.9 
 
 Applicant accumulated a substantial amount of debt, mostly credit card debt, 
while she was unemployed. She admits 10 of the 12 debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
$41,196. (SOR, ¶¶ 1.b – 1.g, 1.i – 1.l). Nine of these ten debts are credit card debts and 
total $41,000. (SOR, ¶¶ 1.b – 1.g, 1.i – 1.k). Applicant’s credit cards became delinquent 
in about 2008. She received collection notices and calls. She has not contacted the 
majority of her creditors to resolve her past-due accounts.10  
 
Applicant satisfied the debt alleged in ¶ 1.k ($839) the Friday before her Monday 
hearing. At hearing, she promised to resolve some of the other minor debts alleged in 
the SOR by the end of the week. She did not submit proof of payment of any other debt 
alleged in the SOR, except ¶ 1.k.11  
 
Applicant has about $200 a month in disposable income, but has not used this 
money to satisfy her past-due accounts, except for recently paying the debt alleged in 
¶1.k. She testified that she is currently living within her means and has not accumulated 
any further debt.12 She did not submit a budget or evidence that she has taken a 
financial counseling course. She testified that her delinquent debt has been and 
continues to be “overwhelming.”13 
 
In May 2010, Applicant submitted her SCA. Section 26 of the SCA required her 
to reveal any derogatory financial information, including debts that were then over 90-
days delinquent. Applicant denied she had derogatory financial information to report. 
Four months later, in September 2010, she was questioned by a government 
investigator about her delinquent debts and the omission of such from her SCA. She 
7 Tr. at 28-29, 55-56, 66-72, 88-90. See also GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 31. 
 
9 Tr. at 32-34. 
 
10 Answer, Tr. at 33, 51-61, 62-63, 65-66. Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h, an unpaid 
veterinary bill and an unknown debt. She has a reasonable basis to dispute both of these debts. Tr. at 48-
51, 61-62. As the resolution of these relatively minor debts, which total less than $1,200, does not impact 
the ultimate conclusion in this case, I find in Applicant’s favor as to these debts. 
 
11 Tr. at 32, 58, 63-65; AE A. 
 
12 Tr. at 32-35, 73-74. 
 
13 Tr. at 27. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
denied intentionally omitting her delinquent debts. Applicant told the investigator that 
she did not have the adverse information available when she completed her SCA.14  
 
Applicant continued to deny that she falsified her SCA at hearing. She testified 
that she “knew full well (she) was in debt” when she filled out her SCA but, in her mind, 
the SCA was “incomplete” when she submitted it online. She intended to get a credit 
report, in order to provide all the information requested, including the specific account 
information for each of her delinquent debts. She did not save the online version of the 
SCA and then add the information requested later. Instead, she submitted the 
“incomplete” SCA.15 She never informed her security manager that the SCA she 
submitted online was “incomplete” because: 
 
I thought the submission would have been up to me. And that's something 
that I didn't, I don't, I didn't share my debt with my colleagues. And my 
colleague who is the security officer, on that one, simply because it's 
something I need to take care of, and I don't want anybody that I have to 
work with in the office looking down on me. . . The way we work in our 
office, we're there for a very long time. You know, early in the morning, 
you know, until whenever at night. 11/12 hours a day. You know, we work 
in the middle of the night. There's a lot of things, you know, fielding phone 
calls from whatever, everything that goes bump in the night. And to have 
somebody look at you, if you look at somebody who's in as much debt as 
me, and it's been that long, it doesn't look that good. And it really doesn't. 
And it's horrifying. And I don't want people in my office looking at me like 
that. So I did not disclose the information to them.16   
 
After submitting the SCA online, Applicant printed the SCA and signed the 
certification claiming that all the information provided was “true, complete, and correct” 
to the best of her “knowledge and belief and are made in good faith.”17 When Applicant 
was asked at hearing why she had not listed her delinquent debt in general terms on the 
SCA, she claimed that there was nowhere on the form to list this information without 
providing specific details regarding each delinquent debt.18 
 
14 GE 2. 
 
15 Tr. at 29-30, 82-87. 
 
16 Tr. at 85-86 (emphasis added). 
 
17 GE 1, Signature Forms; Tr. at 87-88. 
 
18 Tr. at 84-85 (“But they wanted, what the questionnaire had online were account numbers, 
balances, when it was incurred, when the card was stopped, and I didn't have that information. And I did 
not see a place where I could put a verbal in there, that, ‘Yes I have some debt. I need to get all this 
information to you,’ because it is not one or two items where I might have that, you know, readily 
available. But it's quite a few items.” But see GE 1, Additional Comments section (“Use the space below 
to continue answers to all other items and to provide any information you would like to add.”). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.19 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”20 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
20 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $40,000 in bad 
debt since 2008 directly implicates this concern. It also establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”21 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant’s financial trouble is 
directly attributable to her lengthy period of unemployment, she failed to establish that 
she managed her finances in a responsible manner under the circumstances.22 She has 
had a full-time job since 2008 and has been with her current employer for over two 
years, but made no efforts to resolve her debts until a few days before her hearing. She 
has only paid one of the ten SOR debts she admits owing, and still owes over $40,000 
to her overdue creditors.23 She described her financial situation as “overwhelming” and 
submitted no evidence that she has taken any concrete steps to put her financial house 
in order, other than asking her personal injury attorney for assistance in consolidating 
her debts about a year ago. Applicant’s intent to consolidate and satisfy her debts, with 
the assistance of legal counsel, does not demonstrate that her financial problem is 
being resolved or under control.24 Her promises to resolve her long-standing debt and 
recent payment of one of these debts are simply not enough to mitigate the Guideline F 
concern.25 Applicant’s financial problem remains a security concern.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
22 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) (“the second prong of MC 
20(b) requires that an applicant act responsibly under the circumstances”). 
 
23 ISCR Case 09-07792 at 2 (App. Bd. May 10, 2011) (“. . . evidence that Applicant’s debts 
remained delinquent at the close of the record supports . . . conclusion that these debts were ongoing.”). 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 09-01015 at 5 (App. Bd. July 16, 2010) (“Applicant’s stated intention to hire an 
attorney sometime after the hearing and seek a reduction of this debt is at best speculative. There is no 
basis in the record to support a conclusion that such a plan has a reasonable chance of success. As 
such, it merely suggests a ‘potential for eventual debt resolution’ rather than for a track record of actual 
repayment.”).  
 
25 ISCR Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999) (“Promises to take actions in the future, 
however sincere, are not a substitute for a documented track record of remedial actions.”) 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions and find that 
only AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable: 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants 
seeking access to classified information, and begins with the answers provided in the 
SCA. An applicant should err on the side of over-inclusiveness and, when in doubt, 
disclose any potential derogatory information that is responsive to a question in the 
application. However, the omission of material, adverse information standing alone is 
not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified their SCA. Instead, when 
an applicant denies an SOR allegation that they falsified a SCA, the Government bears 
the burden to present substantial evidence that an applicant intentionally did so.26 In 
resolving such cases, an administrative judge must examine the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s intent.27  
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified her SCA when she failed to disclose her 
delinquent debts as alleged in ¶ 2.a of the SOR. She was fully aware that she had 
multiple credit card accounts that were at least 90-days past due when she filled out her 
26 ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“In the case of an omission in a SCA . . 
. the Government’s burden of production requires more than merely showing that the omission occurred. 
Rather, the Government must present substantial evidence that the omission was deliberate.”). See also 
ISCR Case No. 10-04911 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2011) (“Substantial evidence is ‘such relevant evidence 
as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary 
evidence in the same record’.”); ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at n. 1 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011). 
 
27 ISCR Case No. 02-12586 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005) (Appeal Board holds that “(a) when a 
falsification allegation is controverted Department Counsel has the burden of proving falsification; (b) 
proof of omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant's intent or state of mind when 
the omission occurred; and (c) a judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning applicant's state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred.”). See also ISCR Case No. 02-15935 (Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003) (“A case involving 
alleged falsification requires a Judge to make a finding of fact as to an applicant's intent or state of mind 
when the alleged falsification occurred. As a practical matter, when an applicant denies that he or she 
engaged in a falsification, proof of the applicant's intent or state of mind is rarely based on direct 
evidence, but rather often must rely on circumstantial evidence. It is not mere speculation or surmise for a 
Judge to make a finding of fact about an applicant's intent or state of mind based on circumstantial 
evidence. To the contrary, it is legally permissible for a Judge to make a finding of falsification based on 
circumstantial evidence of an applicant's intent or state of mind.”). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
SCA in 2010, because she had stopped paying her credit cards in 2008 and had 
received notices from the creditors. She was required to reveal these delinquent debts 
on her SCA. She failed to disclose them because she was embarrassed about her 
financial situation and did not want her coworkers, including her security officer, to find 
out about it. I did not find her explanation as to why she failed to disclose her delinquent 
debts on her SCA – that she submitted an “incomplete” SCA with the intent to later 
include all the information requested – credible. She never followed up with her security 
officer or informed the Government that her SCA was “incomplete” before being 
confronted by the Government investigator. I find against Applicant as to SOR ¶ 2.a and 
further find that AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth several conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, but only 
AG ¶ 17 (a) merits discussion: 
 
The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the fact. 
 
 Applicant did not disclose her delinquent debts or attempt to correct her 
“incomplete” SCA before being confronted by a government investigator some four 
months after she submitted the SCA. She denied to the investigator and continues to 
deny that she falsified her SCA. The Appeal Board has stated that an applicant who 
deliberately falsifies their SCA commits an “offense that strikes at the very heart of the 
security clearance process.”28 Applicant’s failure to disclose her delinquent debts on the 
SCA and failure to correct this omission leaves AG ¶ 17(a) inapplicable. Applicant failed 
to mitigate the personal conduct concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
28 ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011). 
 
 
10 
 
 
 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case. Applicant 
has worked for DoD as a government contractor, on and off, since 1997. She has made 
certain that overseas installations are properly supplied. She suffered economic 
hardship for two years and had no one that she could rely upon during her time of need. 
However, she has been gainfully employed for over three years now and, when asked 
about her financial situation, falsified her SCA. Applicant has a substantial amount of 
unresolved bad debt and failed to dispel the significant security concerns raised by her 
financial situation, and her falsification of the SCA. The favorable whole-person factors 
present in this case do not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:           For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.g:          Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.h:           For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.l:          Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a           Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is therefore denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
