 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 11-03500    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Between 2006 and 2010, Applicant 
regularly viewed child pornography on his home computer. He does not take 
responsibility for his actions. Nor has he made any efforts toward rehabilitation or 
permanent behavioral changes. As such, he remains vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, and duress. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 10, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual 
bases for the action under the adjudicative guidelines for sexual behavior (Guideline D) 
and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 21, 2011. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 29, 
2011. He did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief, which are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 though 6. Applicant responded to the FORM 
on October 14. His submission is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit A, without objection 
from Department Counsel. The case was assigned to me on November 1, 2011. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant made statements that could be 
construed as a request for a hearing. To clarify the issue, I conducted a conference call 
with Department Counsel and the Applicant. After a lengthy conversation, giving 
Applicant the opportunity to ask procedural questions, he decided to proceed without a 
hearing. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a government contractor. He is divorced 
and has no children. Applicant has been employed as a test engineer for the same 
company since 1984. He has held a security clearance for 25 years and has had access 
to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) since at least 1995.2 
 
 Applicant underwent two polygraph interviews as part of the periodic 
reinvestigation for his SCI clearance with another government agency (OGA) in 2010. 
During the course of the two interviews, he admitted viewing child pornography two to 
three times per week on his home computer from 2006 up to the weekend before the 
polygraph interviews in January 2010. He admitted that he deliberately sought out 
pornographic images of children between the ages of 13 and 17, by executing Internet 
searches using the terms “teen” and “teenager.” He also admitted that he masturbated 
to these images or thoughts of these images several times per week. On at least one 
occasion, he admitted viewing a pornographic image of a child between 10 and 12 
years old. Based on this information, the OGA, in a clearance decision statement dated 
April 10, 2010, revoked Applicant’s SCI access citing sexual behavior and criminal 
conduct concerns.3 
 
                                                          
2 GE 5 – 6. 
 
3 GE 6. 
 
3 
 
 After losing SCI access, DoD suspended Applicant’s security clearance in 
December 2010. In January 2011, an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant about the child pornography issues. At the 
completion of the interview, Applicant executed an affidavit in which he recanted his 
previous admissions. In the affidavit, Applicant admitted accessing a “teen pornography 
site” 20 to 30 times expecting to see pornographic pictures of 18 and 19-year-old adults. 
He was surprised to see pictures of younger children on the site, but he continued to 
look through the images because he could not verify their ages. He reiterated this 
statement in his response to the FORM. Applicant claims that he did not know that 
looking at a teen pornography site on his personal computer raised a security issue. He 
stopped looking at the teen site in March 2010, when he received the denial letter from 
OGA, which contained “vague references to guidelines.”4 
 
Applicant insists that he has no interest in child pornography. He further declares 
that he does not have a problem with pornography of any kind and sees no need for 
counseling. Pornography, he believes, is a private matter. He admits he would be 
embarrassed if his friends and family thought he viewed child pornography because it is 
immoral. Nor does he want to be labeled a pedophile. Applicant believes that he has not 
done anything wrong or engaged in any behavior that runs afoul of any policy or 
regulations related to his security clearance. As such, he believes that he is not 
vulnerable to blackmail or coercion.5  
 
Policies  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
4 GE 7; AE A. 
 
5 GE 7. 
 
4 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The concern regarding an applicant’s sexual behavior is explained in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in the Guideline may be raised solely on the 
bases of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 delineates the conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three of the disqualifying conditions are relevant to this case: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflect lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant viewed, on the Internet, images of nude children, 
images of children in sexually provocative poses, and images of children engaged in 
various sexual acts. Applicant denies the allegation because his admissions to OGA, he 
avers, are insufficient evidence to invoke the application of any of the sexual behavior 
disqualifying conditions. Furthermore, Applicant argues that the Government, in 
particularly DOHA, did not undertake any investigation – such as examining the hard 
drive on his personal computer – to prove that he actually viewed child pornography. 
Absent concrete evidence to verify his admissions to OGA, Applicant argues the 
Government failed to establish a prima facie case under Guideline D. 
 
 Applicant’s arguments are not persuasive. The Government is required to prove 
contested facts by substantial evidence – “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
 
5 
 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in 
the same record.”6 The documents submitted by the Government, the clearance 
decision statement from OGA and affidavit executed by Applicant after his OPM 
interview, satisfy this requirement. Applicant’s self-incriminating admissions cannot be 
ignored nor do they require independent verification. Although the Government did not 
submit evidence to prove the allegation 1.a. as written in the SOR, Applicant’s 
admissions that he routinely viewed child pornography over four years is sufficient to 
merit the application of the Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Conditions cited above. It is 
common knowledge that viewing children engaged in pornography is criminal conduct 
under state and federal law. Given that Applicant has had access to classified 
information and SCI for many years, his conduct shows an ongoing lack of judgment 
and disregard for the fiduciary duty he willingly entered into with the Government. His 
desire to conceal his predilection for child pornography from others underscores his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress.  
 
The allegations in 1.b. and 1.c. – that Applicant masturbated to images or 
thoughts of images of child pornography, do not allege conduct that is disqualifying 
under the sexual behavior guideline. Applicant’s acts of private sexual behavior are 
incident to the underlying disqualifying conduct – accessing and viewing child 
pornography. Furthermore, a person cannot be denied access to classified information 
for the content of their thoughts, no matter how repellant.  
 
None of the Sexual Behavior Mitigating Conditions available under AG ¶ 14 
apply. Applicant’s misconduct began during middle age, his acts of sexual misconduct 
are recent and continued for several years, even during his reinvestigation for SCI 
access. His viewing of child pornography did not occur under any unusual 
circumstances, and continues to cast doubt on his current security worthiness. Given 
the criminal nature of his conduct, it does not matter, as Applicant repeatedly asserts, 
that he only viewed child pornography in the privacy of his home on his personal 
computer. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
6 
 
The following disqualifying condition under ¶ AG 16 is relevant to this case:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country, but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
Applicant’s viewing of child pornography is disqualifying under the same rationale 
discussed above. Although not disqualifying under the sexual behavior guideline, the 
allegations that Applicant masturbates to the images and the thoughts of images of child 
pornography raise concerns under the personal conduct guideline. These facts, if they 
became known publicly, could serve as a basis for exploitation, coercion, or duress, and 
affect applicant’s reputation and public standing. In fact, Applicant recognizes the social 
repercussions of his conduct becoming widely known and wishes it to remain private. 
He does not want to be considered immoral or labeled a pedophile.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant’s 
conduct cannot be classified as minor. Applicant has not taken any steps to reduce his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or duress. Instead, he is trying to protect against 
these risks by concealing his actions from others and couching the matter as “private”. 
 
Whole-person Concept 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
llikelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant viewed child pornography on numerous occasions between 2006 and 
2010. He continued to do so even after his SCI polygraph interviews, which indicates 
that he is unable to control himself or chose not to. His claims that he did not 
intentionally access child pornography on the Internet is disingenuous. It is not credible 
that he executed Internet searches using the terms “teen” and “teenager” to find 
pornographic images of adults. In executing such a broad search, Applicant succeeded 
in finding the images he was looking for, sexually graphic images of teenage children 
under the age of majority. Applicant does not take responsibility for the wrongfulness of 
his actions. He refuses to acknowledge what any reasonable person knows to be illegal 
conduct. He also refuses to acknowledge significant security concerns raised by his 
conduct.  
 
Applicant has held a security clearance for 25 years with access to SCI for the 
past 15 years. He has been through multiple background investigations; he is no rookie 
to this process. His feigned ignorance of the high standards required of those privileged 
to have access to classified information italicizes the doubts about his security 
worthiness. His response to the issues raised confirms an absence of rehabilitation or 
reform and increases the likelihood that he will continue to engage in this conduct. 
 
An evaluation of applicant’s security worthiness is not limited to his duty hours; 
off-duty conduct can be considered in evaluating an applicant’s security worthiness.7 
What Applicant considers his “private” proclivities increases his potential of pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, and duress. The presence of any such risk is not clearly 
consistent with the national interests. As such, Applicant’s access to classified 
information must be revoked.  
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.b. – 1.c.    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a:     Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0620 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999). 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
