 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00049 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guidelines F 
(Financial Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 1, 2010. On May 19, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On July 12, 2011, Applicant answered the 
 
2 
 
 
SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2011. 
DOHA issued the Notice of Hearing on November 17, 2011. The hearing was held as 
scheduled on December 6, 2011. Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 
that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called one 
witness on his behalf, and offered exhibit (AE) A that was admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on December 20, 
2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since April 2007. He graduated from high school in 2000 and attended 
college for less than a year in 2008-2009. He separated from his wife in 2007 and 
thereafter began living with his girlfriend. A few months after their separation, his wife 
moved back into their house. He currently resides with his girlfriend, his wife, and 
another adult roommate. He has two children, an 11-year-old daughter with his wife and 
20-month-old son with his girlfriend. His girlfriend also has a nine-year-old son. He has 
held a security clearance for about ten years without any security violations.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had five delinquent debts totaling $21,932. In his 
Answer to the SOR, he admitted the alleged debts. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact.2 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his marital separation. Before the 
separation, he and his wife shared expenses and were meeting their financial 
obligations. After the separation, he became responsible for all of their debts, including 
his wife’s car payments, and fell behind on some of those payments. He used credit 
cards in an attempt to meet his financial obligations, but also fell behind on some credit 
card payments.3 
 
In his Answer, Applicant provided a draft Debt Management Plan (DMP) 
agreement dated July 7, 2011. Under that draft plan, the first monthly payment of $669 
was due on July 28, 2011. Applicant, however, did not execute that plan. At the hearing, 
he indicated that his business travel from early to late September 2011 interfered with 
him entering into the plan. In his Answer, he also stated that his wife’s car lease was 
due to expire in November 2011, which would free up some of his funds for paying his 
delinquent debts.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 25-26, 39, 42, 45; GE 1. Applicant testified that he separated from his wife in 2009. See 
Tr. 42. However, his e-QIP indicated that they separated in December 2007. Applicant’s girlfriend also 
testified that Applicant and his wife separated in December 2007. See Tr. 26. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
3 Tr. 16-17, 23-24, 34-35; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
4 Tr. 37-38; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
At the hearing, Applicant provided an executed DMP agreement that he signed 
on November 21, 2011. Four of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d) are 
included in that DMP. Under the terms of that plan, Applicant is to make monthly 
payments of $550 until February 2016. He testified that he made the first payment 
under this plan in November 2011, but provided no proof of that payment. He also 
testified that the payments are automatically withdrawn from his bank account, but 
provided no proof that the automatic payments have been established. The agreement 
also provided that the automatic payments may be canceled at any time. Under the 
plan, the DMP company disburses payments to creditors within eight days of confirmed 
receipt of Applicant’s payment. The alleged debt not included in the plan is a $42 
delinquent telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1.e) that remains unresolved, but he indicated that he 
would pay it separately.5  
 
Applicant indicated that he received financial counseling through the DMP. 
Specifically, he received advice from a counselor about financial budgeting and 
spending habits. He indicated that he currently does not have a budget. The DPM 
agreement reflected that his net monthly income was $2,396.64; his total monthly 
expenses were $1,846.33; and his monthly DMP payment was $550.00; which would 
leave him a net monthly remainder of 30 cents. He also testified that his roommates 
were contributing about $400 or $500 to his monthly household bills.6 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has about $100 or $200 of discretionary 
income at the end of the month, but also indicated that he used that money for 
necessities. He stated that he has missed some of his mortgage payments, which are 
approximately $1,100 per month, and was currently two months behind on those 
payments. He has received a letter from the mortgage company threatening 
foreclosure. He also testified that he had $25,000 in a 401(k) retirement account. In the 
past, he has taken funds from the 401(k) account to make mortgage payments, but fell 
behind on them again. He also stated that he had no car payments because his father is 
currently making the payments on his 2009 vehicle at that time. He bought that vehicle 
in August 2010 when he was having financial problems. His father also resolved two of 
his credit card debts. His credit report dated April 6, 2011, indicated that he was making 
payments on four installment accounts with balances totaling $60,999 and one revolving 
account with a balance of $6,997.7 
                                                          
5 Tr. 24-25, 28-29, 31-34, 38-39, 46-47; AE A. The DMP agreement states, “To authorize direct 
draft through the ACH [automated clearance house] network, please have the following authentication 
code available for your next counseling session. The code will be used to authenticate your authorization 
to direct draft your new monthly payment.” No documentation was provided to confirm that Applicant 
activated those ACH payments. The agreement also provides that Applicant could make DMP payments 
by certified check, postal money order, or electronic bank payment.  
6 Tr. 28-30, 36-37, 39-40, 46. 
7 Tr. 34-37, 41-45; GE 1, 2; AE A. None of the four installment accounts or the revolving account 
were alleged as delinquent in the SOR. One of the installment accounts for $2,929 was his wife’s car 
lease that ended in November 2011. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend testified that she contributes to their household expenses. 
She indicated that she contributes to their child’s expenses and also pays the cable and 
Internet bills. She stated that his wife contributes money to the utilities. Applicant 
provided no reference letters or work performance appraisals.8 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
                                                          
8 Tr. 21-30, 36-37. 
 
5 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated five delinquent debts totaling over $21,000 that he was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and significant. He has received 
financial counseling that included advice on budgeting, but he still has not developed a 
monthly budget. His financial situation remains unstable. For example, he relies on his 
father to make his car payments. Based on the evidence, I cannot find that his financial 
problems are under control, that they arose under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur, or that they do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his separation from his wife in 2007. 
Upon their separation, he became responsible for their debts and was unable to meet 
those financial obligations. His marital separation was a condition beyond his control. To 
obtain full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), however, both prongs of that mitigating condition, 
i.e., conditions beyond the individual’s control and responsible conduct, must be 
established. In this case, he has not established that he has acted responsibility under 
the circumstances. He was continually employed during his financial difficulties. Of note, 
his wife moved back into their home only a few months after their separation. Yet, he 
presented no evidence showing that he took any action to resolve the delinquent debts 
until after issuance of the SOR. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not mitigate the 
security concerns in this case.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a draft DMP agreement, dated July 
7, 2011. He indicated that he did not execute that agreement because of his business 
travel in September 2011. Apparently, he also was waiting for a car lease to expire so 
that he would have additional funds to help pay for that program. At the hearing, he 
provided an executed DMP agreement. The agreement was executed after issuance of 
the Notice of Hearing. He testified that he made the first monthly payment of $550 in 
November 2011, but provided no proof. Under the agreement, monthly payments could 
be automatically withdrawn from his account, but he not provided proof that he activated 
the automatic payments. Most importantly, Applicant has failed to provide proof of a 
 
7 
 
 
meaningful track record of making payments on the delinquent debts. Based on the 
evidence presented, I cannot conclude his financial problems are being resolved. AG ¶ 
20(d) partially applies, but does not mitigate the security concern in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has 
presented no proof of payments on the delinquent debts. He has only recently taken 
steps to resolve his financial problems through a DMP, but has failed to establish a 
track record of payments under that plan. After weighing all the evidence in the context 
of the whole-person concept, I find that Applicant’s financial problems remain a security 
concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
