 
 
1 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 11-03426  
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on November 12, 2010 After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
 
 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
  
 
 
2 
 On August 9, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant 
signed a notarized Answer to the SOR on August 29, 2011, in which he admitted the 
allegations under Guideline B. He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 6, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on October 24, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 9, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 1, 2011. I 
admitted two Government Exhibits, (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified, and did not offer 
exhibits or witness testimony. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 9, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I granted Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR to conform to the 
evidence by adding the following two allegations under Guideline B: 
 
 f. Your two sisters and one brother are citizens and residents of Iran. 
 
 g. Your three sisters-in-law and one brother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Iran. 
 
 I take administrative notice of the facts relating to Iran set forth in 15 documents 
submitted by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are limited to 
matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 50 years old, was born in Iran. He completed high school there, and 
served the compulsory two years in the Iranian military. He married in Iran in 2001. He 
and his wife traveled back and forth between the United States and Iran several times 
while she waited to receive U.S. resident status. They have two sons: a nine-year-old 
born in Iran, and a six-year-old born in the United States. He attended a community 
college in the United States but did not complete a degree. He came to the United 
States in 1990 and became a naturalized citizen in 2002. This is his first application for 
                                                 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which supersede the 
guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. The AG apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3 
a security clearance. His position as a linguist for the defense contractor who is 
sponsoring him depends on his obtaining a security clearance. In March 2011, Applicant 
surrendered his valid Iranian passport to the company’s facility security officer. (GE 1, 2; 
Tr. 23-32, 67)  
 
Applicant's father, an Iranian citizen, died there in the 1980s. Applicant's sister 
came to the United States about 35 to 40 years ago and obtained resident status. She 
has traveled to Iran twice in the past ten years. She sponsored Applicant and their 
mother. His mother, who is 78 years old, later sponsored his siblings. Applicant's wife, 
sons, mother, three brothers and one sister are dual U.S.-Iranian citizens, living in the 
United States. They all maintain valid Iranian passports, which they use when they 
travel to Iran to visit family. Applicant's sister works for an insurance company, and his 
brothers are electricians. The spouses of his siblings are Iranian citizens, and most are 
awaiting approval of their status as legal U.S. residents. Applicant has weekly contact 
with his family in the United States. (GE 2; Tr. 23-39, 46, 53, 60) 
 
Applicant also has two sisters, one brother, and six in-laws who are citizens and 
residents of Iran. He speaks with his sisters and brother by telephone about three or 
four times per year. His brother works in a food factory. His sisters are both 
homemakers. One of their husbands is an electrical engineer, and the other works in 
food purchasing. His sisters and brother visited the United States two or three years 
ago, but decided they did not wish to live here, and returned to Iran. Applicant's wife 
recently applied for resident status for her parents. Her father is a retired bank manager 
and her mother is a homemaker. Applicant's brother-in-law is an electrical engineer. 
One of his three sisters-in-law is a teacher, one works for a bank, and the other is a 
student. His wife speaks with her parents and sisters almost weekly. (GE 2; Tr. 39-40, 
43-44, 48-49, 59-60, 68-70, 76) 
 
Applicant's wife and sons visited Iran for one or two months in summer 2011, 
and stayed with her parents. Applicant did not join them. He traveled to Iran in 2006 
and 2008, and has not been there since then. Although he was a U.S. citizen at the 
time, he used his Iranian passport for these trips to Iran. Now that he has given his 
Iranian passport to the FSO, he does not intend to travel to Iran because “… you go 
with [sic] American citizen, then you don't know what's going to happen to you. I'm not 
intending to go there. It's risky.” (GE 2; Tr. 40-41, 44-45, 51-53, 58, 63-65) 
 
Applicant's mother and brother also traveled to Iran for one month this year. 
Another brother traveled to Iran in November 2011 to bring his wife and two children to 
the United States, after they received U.S. visas. Neither Applicant nor his wife provides 
financial support to family members in Iran. All of his male relatives have served the 
compulsory two years in the Iranian military, with the most recent service occurring in 
the mid-1990s. None have government-related jobs. (GE 2; Tr. 40-41, 44-45, 51-53, 58, 
63, 73) 
 
 
 
4 
Applicant currently lives in a rental unit. However, he owns a condominium, 
which he rents out. He estimates its value at $80,000 to $90,000. He does not own 
property in Iran. He has one U.S. bank account, and no foreign accounts. He does not 
own either U.S. or foreign investments. (Tr. 54-56)  
 
Administrative Notice: Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional, theocratic, Islamic republic, founded in 1979 after a 
revolution that removed the Shah as head of state. Islamic law is the basis for the 
authority of the Iranian state. Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the country’s political 
structure, and ultimate political power rests in a Shi’a religious scholar, who is called 
the Supreme Leader.  
 
The United States has not had diplomatic or consular relations with Iran since 
1979. In 2010, the President declared the continuation of a 1979 declaration of a 
National Emergency with Respect to Iran in order “to deal with the unusual and 
extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United 
States constituted by the situation in Iran.”  
 
 Iran engages in clandestine efforts to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and 
other sensitive technology, and to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD). A U.S. government assessment as of February 2011 noted 
that Iran has the scientific, technical, and industrial ability to eventually produce nuclear 
weapons. Additionally, Iran sponsors international terrorism, intervenes in the internal 
affairs of Iraq and Afghanistan, undermines the Middle East peace process, and 
violates the human rights of the Iranian people. 
 
Iran has been designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism since 1984, and 
remains one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. According to the U.S. 
Department of State, it provides planning and financial support for terrorist attacks 
throughout the Middle East, Europe, and Central Asia. Iran trains, equips and funds 
select Iraqi Sh’ia militant groups. It has refused to bring to justice senior al-Qa’ida 
members it has detained. The United States is concerned about the possibility that 
terrorists could eventually obtain WMD from Iran.  
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S.-Iranian dual citizens to consider carefully 
the risks of travel to Iran. Iranian authorities do not recognize dual citizenship, and 
consider Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens and their children to be solely Iranian 
citizens. The State department also warns that U.S. citizens of Iranian origin may be 
subject to harassment or arrest while in Iran, and should carefully consider the risk of 
being targeted by Iranian authorities. Such dual citizens have had their U.S. passports 
confiscated, and have been denied permission to exit Iran. Visitors from abroad may 
have their personal possessions in hotel rooms searched, have their telephones 
monitored, and be placed under surveillance. 
 
 
 
5 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3
 
 Decisions 
also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.5 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to safeguard 
classified information. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.6
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
                                                 
3 Directive §6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion 
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 I have considered all the conditions under AG ¶ 7 that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying, especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The possession of family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country is not 
disqualifying under Guideline B, unless those ties create a conflict of interest or a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation. Applicant lives with his wife and children, who 
are U.S. citizens, but also retain their citizenship with Iran. Moreover, he has frequent 
contact with his mother and siblings who are also dual U.S.-Iranian citizens. Although 
Applicant’s last visit to Iran was three years ago, his wife and children traveled this year 
to spend time with family. The country in question must be considered.7
 
 Iran and the 
United States have had a hostile relationship. It has been designated as a state 
sponsor of terrorism since 1984, and remains one of the most active state sponsors of 
terrorism. The State Department warns that dual U.S-Iranian citizens who travel to Iran 
must exercise particular vigilance during travel. Such dual citizens have had their U.S. 
passports confiscated, and have been denied permission to exit Iran.  
 Applicant’s testimony and the record evidence indicate that he has ties of 
affection to his family members who are dual U.S.-Iranian citizens, and to those who 
remain in Iran. Applicant's ties and contacts with his foreign family represent a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, and a potential conflict of interest between his 
                                                 
9 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (Ap. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
7 
ties to his family and the requirement to protect classified information. AG ¶ 7(a), (b) 
and (d) apply.  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Given Applicant’s relationships with his foreign family, he could be placed in a 
position that could force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound 
by ties of affection to his wife and children, his mother, and his siblings in the United 
States, who are dual U.S.-Iranian citizens. He also maintains a relationship with his 
foreign siblings and in-laws. All of his relatives are either Iranian citizens or dual U.S.-
Iranian citizens. Iran abuses the rights of its citizens, provides planning and financial 
support for widespread terrorist attacks, and trains, equips and funds select Iraqi Sh’ia 
militant groups. AG ¶ 8(a) cannot be applied. 
 
  I also considered the extent of Applicant's U.S. ties, including his 20 years of 
living and working in the United States, the fact that several family members have 
obtained U.S. citizenship, and his property ownership. However, these facts must be 
weighed against his ties and ongoing relationships with foreign nationals who live in 
Iran. His contacts with his family are not casual, and his conduct demonstrates ties of 
affection to them. Given these ties, I cannot confidently conclude he would resolve a 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) and (c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
 
 
8 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States in not in question. He has been a U.S. 
citizen for almost ten years, and several family members have also become U.S. 
citizens. However, his foreign ties place him in a position where he might have to 
choose between his family’s interests and the interests of the United States. 
Applicant’s foreign ties raise security concerns because of his ongoing relationships. 
He is in touch with numerous family members in Iran, including three immediate family 
members, his siblings. Applicants face a heavy burden to overcome Iran’s hostile 
relationship with the United States, and its long-standing designation as a state 
sponsor of terrorism. In addition, the U.S. State Department urges caution by dual 
U.S.-Iranian citizens traveling to Iran because of the possibility of being detained by 
authorities, and Applicant's wife, children, mother and brother, who are dual citizens, 
continue to travel to Iran. All of these facts represent a heightened and unacceptable 
security concern. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised under the guideline for foreign influence. 
Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
   
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
