KEYWORD: Guideline H: Guideline E; Guideline G
DIGEST: The Government must present substantial evidence in regard SOR allegations that
have been controverted.  Once it has done so, it has no further burden.  The burden of persuasion
shifts to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns in his case.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-00391.a1
DATE: 12/01/2011
DATE: December 1, 2011
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-00391
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Palmer A. Hoovestal, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 14, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
September 14, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed properly to weigh
the record evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines E and G are not at
issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an employee of a
Defense contractor.  Married with two grown children, he has a bachelor’s degree.
Applicant smoked marijuana “a few times a year from 1978 to June 2010.”  Decision at 2.
This use normally occurred at his family’s cabin.  He would smoke marijuana with his siblings.  He
sometimes went for as long as a year without using marijuana, and he never purchased it.
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in1996 and subsequently was
awarded a security clearance.  After receiving his clearance, Applicant continued to smoke
marijuana.  He left his job in 2001 and took another that did not require a clearance.
In 2008, Applicant tested positive on a random drug screening by his employer.  He kept his
job, but he was required to sign a document acknowledging that another positive drug test would
result in loss of his job.  Applicant was also subjected to additional drug tests.  Later that year,
Applicant was assessed by a licensed addiction counselor (LAC), who concluded that Applicant had
abused marijuana but that he was not dependent on the drug. 
In June 2010 Applicant smoked marijuana during a visit to the family cabin.  He tested
positive for the drug and was dismissed from his job.  He submitted to counseling by another LAC,
who recommended, inter alia, that Applicant “achieve and maintain abstinence from marijuana[.]”
Id. at 3.  
Applicant has not used marijuana since his last positive drug test.  He has not discontinued
associating with his siblings, one of whom may still smoke marijuana, and he still goes to the family
cabin.    
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for his job performance, responsibility, reliability,
trustworthiness, and judgment.  His colleagues recommended him for a clearance.
In the Analysis, the Judge noted favorable evidence, such as Applicant’s expressed intent
to remain drug free and his absence of drug use since 2010.  However, the Judge also noted that
Applicant had previously signed a document stating his understanding that future use would result
in a loss of employment and yet smoked marijuana anyway.  The Judge stated that Applicant’s
history of drug use “continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.”
Id. at 6.  The Judge stated that the record left him “with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.”  Id. at 9.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his application of the mitigating conditions,
arguing that the Judge mis-weighed the record evidence.  Applicant argues that the Government’s
failure to rebut Applicant’s character witnesses and other evidence constituted a failure to meet its
burden of production under Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  Applicant contends that his unrebutted evidence
of good character and security worthiness supported a favorable decision and that the Judge’s
1See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06859 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2010), stating that, in a DOHA hearing, the
Government’s burden is to present substantial evidence regarding any controverted allegation.  Substantial evidence is
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
adverse holding was founded upon his failure properly to weigh this evidence.
The Guideline H security concern is as follows: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 24.
By the very language of the Directive, illegal drug use is a matter of security concern, not simply
because a person under the influence of drugs might fail to protect classified information but because
such use calls into question the person’s possession of the very qualities of judgment and reliability
that are essential to protecting national security.
We have considered Applicant’s brief and are not persuaded by his argument regarding the
Government’s burden of production.  The Government is required to present substantial evidence
of those allegations in the SOR that are controverted.1  That is, the Government’s burden extends
only to those SOR allegations which the applicant has denied.  In this case, however, Applicant
admitted all the allegations, relieving the Government of any burden of production.  Nevertheless,
at the hearing the Government presented Applicant’s current SCA and a previous one, as well as his
answers to DOHA interrogatories.  Accordingly, even without considering Applicant’s admissions
to the SOR, the record contained substantial evidence of security concerns under Guideline H.  The
passage of the Directive upon which Applicant relies does not place a further burden on the
Government to present rebuttal evidence following Applicant’s case or at any other point in the
hearing.  
Once an applicant’s SOR admissions and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security
concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant to mitigate the concern.  The governing
standard is set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988): “[A] clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” The
Directive requires a Judge to resolve any doubt in favor of national security.  Directive, Enclosure
2 ¶ 2(b).  In this case, having properly concluded that Applicant’s case raised security concerns
under Guideline H, the Judge evaluated the evidence in light of Applicant’s burden of persuasion.
While the Judge discussed the evidence favorable to Applicant, he plausibly explained his
conclusion that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion.  The Judge noted that Applicant had
used marijuana while holding a security clearance.  He also appeared to give weight to evidence that
Applicant used marijuana despite having been placed on notice that such behavior was not
compatible with his continued employment.  Such evidence could suggest to a reasonable person
that Applicant lacks a sufficient willingness to follow rules as to justify entrusting him with national
2See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008): “As a matter of common sense, one would
expect that a person who had taken a drug test as a condition of employment would understand the importance of future
abstention.  That Applicant used marijuana after such a test raises a substantial question as to whether she has
demonstrated a serious intent to obey the law[.]”  See also ISCR Case No. 09-07472 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011), in
which the Judge based his adverse decision, inter alia, “on the fact that Applicant’s drug use while holding a security
clearance constituted a serious breach of trust [and that] Applicant knew that marijuana use and possession were
proscribed[.]”
security information.2  Considering the record as a whole, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence.  The mere absence of Government evidence rebutting Applicant’s
character witnesses does not undermine the Judge’s decision.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
