 
 
1 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 11-00561 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns related to foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns addressed in 
the Directive under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). This action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on May 20, 2011, Applicant 
denied any security concerns under Guidelines B and C, but admitted all the factual 
allegations under both guidelines. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
June 20, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on July 5, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on July 29, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 23, 
2011. The Government offered two exhibits, marked and admitted as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant offered five exhibits, admitted as Applicant's Exhibits 
(AE) A through E. The hearing was continued unexpectedly when an earthquake 
required evacuation of the building. 
 
A second Notice of Hearing was issued on September 21, 2011. After 
consultation with Department Counsel, Applicant agreed to a date of September 28, 
2011. At the hearing on that date, he stated that he waived his right to 15 days notice of 
the second hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the first hearing (Tr. I) on August 
31, 2011, and the second hearing (Tr. II) on October 7, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to India. Department Counsel provided a six-page summary of the facts, 
supported by 16 documents pertaining to India. The documents provide elaboration and 
context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. 
Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to 
reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 38 years old, was born in India. He earned a bachelor’s degree at an 
Indian university. He has never worked for the Indian government1
 
 nor served in the 
Indian military. (Tr. I, 24) He came to the United States in 1995 at the age of 23, and 
completed a master’s degree in 1998 at a U.S. university. He married his current wife in 
India in 2000, after which she moved with him to the United States. They became U.S. 
citizens in 2009 and hold U.S. passports. India’s constitution does not permit dual 
citizenship, and Applicant's acquisition of U.S. citizenship effectively cancelled his Indian 
citizenship. Applicant's two daughters, who are six and ten years old, are native-born 
U.S. citizens. (GE 1; AE C, D; Tr. I at 23-27) 
                                                          
1In almost all instances where the word “government” was used at the August 23, 2011, hearing, the 
transcript mistakenly inserts the word “embassy.” The word “embassy” is correctly used only on pages 10, 
11, and 48 to 50. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant began working for his current employer, a defense contractor, as a data 
architect in May 2010. Previously, Applicant worked as a software consultant. He 
submitted character reference letters from coworkers who knew him when he worked at 
an international agency from 1999 to 2010. One coworker, who has known Applicant for 
ten years, has complete confidence in his character and praised his work ethics. He 
noted that Applicant worked with confidential budgetary, financial, and personnel 
information “and showed the utmost care in safeguarding this information and being fully 
compliant to the {agency’s} information security guidelines.”  He was dedicated and loyal, 
and led highly complex and sensitive projects. Another coworker, who has known 
Applicant for seven years, worked with him on a daily basis at the same federal agency. 
He agreed that Applicant was completely trustworthy when handling highly confidential 
data, he performed at an exceptional level, and was well respected by his colleagues 
and managers. (GE 1; AE E)  
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His 66-year-old mother is a 
life-long homemaker. His 71-year-old father has been retired since the mid-1990s from a 
management position in a government-owned telephone company. He receives a 
government pension. Applicant talks with his parents once per week. They last traveled 
to the United States six years ago when his youngest child was born. They stayed with 
Applicant for four months. Applicant noted in his interrogatory response that, as one of 
three children, he has an obligation to care for his parents. (GE 2; Tr. I at 51, 54-61, 65) 
 
Applicant's brother is 39. He is a software consultant for a privately owned 
company, and his wife is a homemaker. Applicant's 43-year-old sister (Tr. 56) is a 
homemaker, and her husband is owns an auto parts factory. Applicant last saw them 
when he visited India in 2010. He speaks with his siblings for a few minutes about once 
or twice per month. (GE 2; Tr. I at 51, 54-61, 65) 
 
Among Applicant's additional foreign contacts are eight in-laws, three aunts, and 
three friends, all of whom are citizens and residents of India. His father-in-law is 
approximately 67. He retired from a bank position, and now manages a private school. 
Applicant's mother-in-law is a 60-year-old homemaker. They last visited Applicant in 
2000. He speaks with them about once or twice per month. Applicant's sisters-in-law are 
all homemakers. Of his three brothers-in-law, one works at a packaging company, one is 
an attorney, and one owns an auto parts factory. He speaks with them about once per 
month. Two of his three aunts are retired schoolteachers, and one is a homemaker. One 
of the retired teachers worked at a government school.2
 
 He speaks with his aunts about 
once per year. None of Applicant's male relatives, including his in-laws, have served in 
the Indian military. When he visits India, he visits with all the family members. Applicant 
speaks to his three friends in India about once per year, and sometimes visit them when 
he travels to India. Applicant visited his family in India six times between 2004 and 2010, 
and expects to go in 2012. (GE 1, 2; Tr. I at 44-47, 56-61, 64-71) 
                                                          
2 During Applicant's security interview, he stated that all three aunts were homemakers. (GE 2 at page 3) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has three bank accounts in India for convenience, with total funds of 
approximately $5,300. He opened one in about 1998, before his marriage, and the other 
two between 2000 and 2002. In 2003 and 2004, he purchased two undeveloped plots of 
land in India for investment purposes. He estimates the total value of the lots to be 
$20,000. He intends to hold the land and await a rebound in the real estate market. He 
does not pay taxes on the lots. In 2004, Applicant purchased a life insurance policy with 
an Indian company, with a current cash value of about $10,000. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. II at 11, 
30-31)  
 Applicant has three U.S. bank accounts that total approximately $23,000. He also 
has several individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and “529” plans for his daughters’ 
college educations in the United States. He estimated the value of these accounts at 
$130,000. He holds a term life insurance policy with a U.S. company. (Tr. II at 16) He 
does not own a home in the United States. (GE 2; Tr. II at 12-14) 
 
India allows former citizens to obtain an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) card. The 
card grants certain rights to former Indian citizens living abroad. The Indian Ministry of 
Home Affairs website describes the OCI as a life-long visa that allows a former Indian 
citizen multiple visits to India.3
 
 The holder of an OCI card is not required to register with 
local police during visits to India, and is considered to be on a par with non-resident 
Indians for economic, financial, and educational purposes. However, OCI card holders 
do not have unrestricted rights: they may not vote in Indian elections or hold elected 
positions in the Indian government. An OCI holder can regain Indian citizenship after 
maintaining a registered OCI card for five years, and residing in India for one year. (AE 
D) 
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) has stated that an OCI card is “similar to a 
U.S. ‘green card’ in that a holder can travel to and from India indefinitely, work in India, 
study in India, and own property in India (except for certain agricultural and plantation 
properties.” The DOS also notes that the OCI program “has often been mischaracterized 
as a dual nationality program. It does not grant Indian citizenship. If you are a U.S. 
citizen and obtain an OCI card you will not become a citizen of India; you will remain a 
citizen of the United States.” (Administrative Notice, Item IV at p. 11) In addressing the 
ramifications of the OCI card, the DOHA Appeal Board held that an administrative judge 
is bound by the official pronouncements of federal agencies on matters of national 
security.4
 
 
Applicant applied for an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) card in 2010 for 
convenience in traveling to India. To obtain the OCI, Applicant sent his Indian passport to 
                                                          
3 Some of the terminology on the website is confusing. It explains that India does not allow Indian 
citizenship to be held simultaneously with citizenship of another country. On the other hand, it notes that, 
“…the Government of India decided to grant Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) commonly known as 
‘dual citizenship.’” It also states that persons of Indian origin who acquire foreign citizenship can receive 
an OCI as long as the country where they obtain citizenship allows some form of dual citizenship. (AE D) 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 07-13232 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul 8, 2008).  
 
 
5 
 
 
the Indian embassy, which cancelled his Indian passport, and issued Applicant the OCI 
card. The OCI status is represented in Applicant's U.S. passport as a Republic of India 
“U” visa, dated November 2010. (AE C) Applicant's wife and children followed the same 
procedure, and all hold OCI cards. He retains possession of his cancelled Indian 
passport, which was valid until 2013. (GE 2; AE B; Tr. 1, 35-37) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was asked whether he intended to return to India to live, 
and answered, “Not in the near future.” (Tr. II at 18) As to his long-term intentions, 
Applicant stated,  
 
It's--currently it looks like, you know, I--I mean, I have thought often of 
going back, but, you know, it never seemed  realistic, to like go back, you 
know, with the kids' education, and, you know, just everything….for the 
last five years I have been thinking, okay, I'll go back; but then, you know, 
I continue to stay here. So I don't know whether I'll go back or not. (Tr. II 
at 19-20) 
 
He explained that he might live and work in India for a number of years, and then move 
back to the United States when his daughters attend college. He then commented that 
America seemed to be a better place “for ladies” and for security. (Tr. II at 21) When 
asked if he could explain his loyalties to India versus the United States, Applicant 
testified,  
 
Sure. I mean, you know, I guess your concern is that, you know, if I go 
back, how could you trust me with, you know, even the clearance and 
working here. I guess that more comes down to the real character, rather 
than like a preference. (Tr. II at 22) 
 
He then explained that his preference is not for India, but for his family. If he could return 
to India and have a comparable standard of living, and be able to spend time with his 
family, then he would like to keep that option open. (Tr. II at 23) 
 
So it's, it's not that--so, you know, I mean, I can understand your concern 
because -- but as a foreign national, for me, I would -- you know, it's very 
natural for me to be inclined to a place where I have grown up, and not--
it's--it's the people whom I have been with, and, you know, it's--my 
parents have not been able to come here.   
So, you know, that's the reason why I'm feeling more than -- I have 
thought of it more. It's just that it's -- it's not easily done. So, you know, 
I'm not sure when I will go back and if I will go back.  But it -- you know -- 
I think about it. (Tr. II at 23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Republic of India (India)  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.5
 
 India is a sovereign, socialist, 
secular democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a 
bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Since gaining 
independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, particularly with regard to its 
relations with Pakistan.  
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability has 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human 
rights violations went unpunished.  
 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, and its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, the United States recognizes India as key to 
its strategic interests and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two countries 
are the world’s largest democracies. Both are committed to political freedom protected 
by representative government, and share common interests in the free flow of 
commerce and creating a strategically stable Asia. India has demonstrated its 
commitment to political freedom. The United States and India issued a joint statement of 
their intentions to foster bilateral relations by establishing working groups to address 
strategic cooperation, energy and climate change, education, economics, trade, 
agriculture, science, technology, health, and innovation. 
 
India and the United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. 
However, according to the Department of State’s 2010 report on counterterrorism, India 
remains one of the countries most afflicted by terrorism. Sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots and violent attacks by a variety of separatists and terrorist groups have occurred. 
 
An annual report to Congress on foreign economic collection and espionage 
described India, along with seven other countries, as involved in criminal espionage and 
export controls enforcement cases. The cases involve the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and 
equipment that present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Governmental 
and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. The report to Congress 
noted that foreign collectors “target a wide variety of unclassified and classified 
information in a range of sectors.” 
                                                          
5 The facts cited derive from the summary and the 16 U.S. Government documents submitted by 
Department Counsel.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.6
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest7
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.8 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.9
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern involving foreign preference arises when an individual acts 
in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, 
                                                          
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
9 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful 
to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) 
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
Applicant’s Indian passport was valid until 2013. He continued to possess it after 
he became a U.S. citizen in 2009. He forwarded it to the Indian embassy to be 
cancelled as part of his application for an OCI card in 2010. During the interim, 
Applicant possessed a valid foreign passport while he was a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 10 (a) 
(1) applied during that period. 
 
The U.S. DOS notes the confusion about whether OCI card holders are dual 
citizens. Moreover, the language in the Indian government document submitted by 
Applicant is puzzling. It states that the Indian government does not recognize dual 
citizenship, i.e., simultaneous citizenship of India and another country. Nevertheless, it 
refers to the OCI card-holder as an Overseas Citizen of India [emphasis added] and 
describes OCI status with the words “dual citizenship.” It also states that a person can 
obtain an OCI card if the country where he or she obtains new citizenship allows dual 
citizenship, implying that OCI is a form of citizenship. However, the Appeal Board has 
held that administrative judges are bound by the pronouncements of federal 
government agencies, such as DOS. In December 2010, the DOS stated that the OCI 
program is “mischaracterized” when called a dual nationality program. It stated that the 
OCI program does not grant Indian citizenship, and that the OCI card is similar to the 
U.S. “green card.” I conclude therefore, that an OCI card does not confer Indian 
citizenship, and is not the equivalent of an Indian passport. Possession of an OCI card 
is not disqualifying under AG ¶10 (a)(1).  
 
 Applicant’s application for an OCI card is an exercise of a right of foreign 
citizenship that occurred after he became a U.S. citizen in 2009. He sought an OCI 
card, which required recognition of his former Indian citizenship. He was eligible for an 
OCI card only because he had been an Indian citizen. He exercised a right granted only 
to former Indian citizens, but not extended to those who have never been Indian 
citizens. AG ¶ 10(a) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 11 contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions, especially the following: 
 
 
9 
 
 
 (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 India does not recognize dual citizenship. By becoming a U.S. citizen in 2009, 
Applicant not only showed willingness to renounce his Indian citizenship, but actually 
did renounce it. He also knew that, when he submitted his Indian passport to the Indian 
embassy to obtain an OCI card, it would be cancelled, and thus invalidated. AG ¶ 11(b) 
and (e) apply, and mitigate the concerns under Guideline C. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 The possession of family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country is not 
disqualifying under Guideline B, unless those ties create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation or a potential conflict of interest. The country in question must be 
considered. Violent attacks by separatists and terrorist groups have occurred in India. In 
addition, according to the Department of State, it remains one of the countries most 
afflicted by terrorism. Applicant’s testimony and the record evidence indicate that he has 
ties of affection and obligation to his Indian family. He stated in his interrogatory 
response that he has an obligation to assist his family in India. He talks with his Indian 
parents by telephone weekly, and with other family members once or twice per month. 
He visits India regularly, and intends to continue visiting his family there in the future. He 
has obtained an OCI card, a life-long visa allowing unrestricted visits, in order to ensure 
the ease of his future travel to India. Applicant's ties and contacts in India, with family 
members to whom he has a sense of affection and obligation, represent a heightened 
risk of exploitation and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 For approximately seven years, Applicant has owned two lots in India, valued at 
about $20,000. He holds these properties as investments, and intends to keep them 
until the real estate market improves. He also has three bank accounts with funds of 
about $5,300, which he has maintained for ten or more years. The property in India 
represents the only real estate Applicant owns. AG ¶ 7(e) applies. 
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, AG ¶ 8, 
especially the following:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant maintains contact with the Indian relatives and friends listed in the 
SOR. Although his weekly contact with his parents is the most frequent, he also keeps 
in touch with siblings once or twice per month. Moreover, he testified that he is 
considering returning to India to be with his family. The facts demonstrate that his 
contacts with his family are not casual, and that he has strong ties of affection and 
obligation to them. Given this attachment, I cannot confidently conclude that he would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) and (c) do not 
 
 
11 
 
 
apply. Applicant has several bank accounts and two properties in India. However, his 
funds located in U.S. banks outweigh the value of these financial ties to India. AG ¶8(e) 
applies. However, the mitigation under AG ¶ 8(e) is insufficient to outweigh the 
disqualifying conduct under Guideline B. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
I considered the extent of Applicant's U.S. ties, including his more than 15 years 
in the United States, his U.S. graduate education, his substantial financial ties, and his 
wife and children, who are U.S. citizens. However, Applicant's attachment to India and 
his family there raises security concerns. He maintains ongoing relationships with 
foreign citizens, including his parents, sister, brother, and numerous in-laws. His 
attachment to his parents is evident from his statement in the interrogatory response 
that he has an obligation to care for them, his weekly contact with them, and his regular 
visits to see them in India. His attachments are also apparent in his ambivalence about 
his intentions to remain in the United States. He has an emotional attachment to the 
country where he was born and raised and where many of his close family members 
live. All these facts raise security concerns as to how Applicant would resolve any 
conflicts of interest that might arise. 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
 
 
12 
 
 
raised under the guidelines for foreign influence and foreign preference. Such doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 1.a   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a  – 2.g  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.h – 2.j  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
