1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00257 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Terry L. Falls, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns about his financial problems. 
Moreover, he deliberately falsified his May 2009 security clearance application when he 
failed to disclose his delinquent debts, a traffic ticket, and a misdemeanor charge. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 11, 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant a security clearance.  
 
2 
 
On July 1, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2
 
  
Applicant answered the SOR on August 4, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 27, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on October 3, 2011, convening a hearing on October 24, 
2011. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 14. Applicant 
testified, presented one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 and 2. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
On October 20, 2011, the Government moved to amend the SOR by striking 
certain subparagraphs and renumbering the SOR. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1) Applicant 
did not object. I granted the motion as requested, with one exception. I struck SOR ¶ 
2.v, instead of SOR ¶ 2.c (duplicate allegations). (Tr. 17-18) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the SOR allegations under ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, and 2.a (alleges 
the same facts alleged in ¶ 1.a). He did not admit or deny any of the remaining 
allegations. I entered a “deny” for all remaining SOR allegations. After a thorough 
review of all the evidence, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old systems technician working for a defense contractor. 
He graduated from high school in 1997, and enlisted in the U.S. Navy in October 1999. 
He was honorably discharged in August 2005 as a petty officer third class (pay grade E-
4). He started taking college courses in 2005, and has accumulated approximately 40 
college credit hours, but he has not completed a degree. While in the Navy, Applicant 
possessed a secret security clearance. Since 2005, he has worked for different 
government contractors, and he retained his access to classified information up to his 
hearing day. There is no evidence to show that Applicant has compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information. 
 
Following his discharge from the service, Applicant was unemployed for two 
months. Since September 2005, he has been continuously employed with different 
government contractors, except for one to two weeks of unemployment in between jobs. 
Applicant worked for government contractor “N” from September 2005 until September 
2008. He was making approximately $57,000 a year. He resigned his position with N, 
because of perceived harassment from his supervisor. He believed his supervisor was 
trying to reduce his section’s employees by making some employees’ life so hard they 
would have to resign. Applicant worked for government contractor “L” from September 
                                            
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
3 
 
2008 until March 2010. His salary was approximately $50,000 a year. He resigned that 
position because he did not like working in a military environment. He worked as a 
security guard from March 2010 until July 2010. He has worked with his current 
employer since July 2010. 
 
Applicant married his wife in February 2001. They have two children, ages eight 
and two. His wife is suffering from psychological and physical problems. She was 
diagnosed with depression and a bipolar personality disorder. Applicant’s wife stopped 
contributing to the household finances around 2007-2008. Because of her medical 
problems, she has been unemployed and in long-term medical disability. They 
separated in 2008.  
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems were caused by the reduction of 
his income that resulted from his job changes, his wife’s medical problems (her 
unemployment and her inability to make financial contributions to the household), being 
the sole provider for his children and his estranged wife, and the increased financial 
expenses associated with the marital separation and maintaining two households. His 
yearly income was reduced by $7,000 in 2008, when he resigned his position with N 
and started working for L. His work as a security guard from March until July 2010, paid 
$21 hourly. His current hourly pay rate is $28.63, and he clears approximately $3,400 a 
month. Applicant averred his earnings are not sufficient for him to pay his delinquent 
financial obligations and pay for his and his family’s day-to-day living expenses. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.a (cross-alleged in ¶ 2.a), Applicant testified that, in 2007, 
while working for company N, his then supervisor encouraged him to open a corporate 
credit card to pay for his business travel expenses. When he received the corporate 
credit card, Applicant signed a company brochure stating that the corporate credit card 
could not be used for personal expenses. At his hearing, he acknowledged he signed 
the brochure, but claimed he did not read it. He claimed he believed he was applying for 
a personal credit card. (Tr. 59) 
 
Applicant maintained a low balance on his corporate credit card, and charged no 
personal expenses on it, until about 45 days before he submitted his resignation from 
company N. After Applicant applied for employment with company L, he charged 
approximately $10,000 in personal expenses to company N’s corporate credit card. He 
averred that a family member was in critical medical condition. He used the corporate 
credit card to purchase plane tickets for himself and some relatives. He claimed his 
relatives failed to reimburse him for the plane tickets as promised. At his hearing, he 
testified he believed he was allowed to make personal purchases using the corporate 
credit card. However, during his November 2010 interview with a government 
investigator, Applicant stated he knew he was not allowed to make personal charges on 
his corporate credit card. He told the investigator that his poor financial situation forced 
him to charge personal expenses on the corporate credit card. The company’s (N) 
financial records showed that Applicant used the corporate credit card to pay for 
restaurant bills, home improvement store charges, and several airline tickets. (GE 2) 
 
4 
 
Applicant testified that he always intended to pay the corporate credit card debt, 
but he was unable to do so because of his financial situation. He claimed he made a 
$500 payment sometime in 2008. He also claimed that he made two payments after 
January 2011, but he stopped making payments when he filed (pro se) for a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection. His bankruptcy filing was dismissed when he failed to attend a 
meeting with the trustee. He intends to file again for bankruptcy protection with the help 
of an attorney. His father-in-law is giving him the money to pay the attorney fees. 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence of payments made to the corporate 
credit card account or of his bankruptcy filing. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are established by the Government’s evidence. 
Applicant claimed he was not aware of the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b 
through 2.y until he received the SOR, because he was not communicating with his 
wife. She was receiving the bills and collection notices, but she did not provide them to 
him. He claimed that after receipt of the SOR, he started to contact his creditors to 
resolve his delinquent debts. He admitted responsibility for the debts and promised to 
resolve them as soon as possible. He stated that his financial situation worsened 
around May 2008, because of his lower income, car payment, mortgage payment for 
the marital residence, and the rent for his apartment. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, 2.r, 2.s, 2.t, and 2.u allege unpaid medical debts. Applicant and 
his father-in-law testified that Applicant’s wife was not paying the medical bills, did not 
submit them for payment with her insurance, and did not notify Applicant that a 
copayment was due. Apparently, because of her medical condition and their marital 
separation, she received the bills and disposed of them without notifying Applicant. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted the delinquent credit card debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.e ($1,542). He had two credit card accounts with the same creditor. He paid one of 
the accounts (for less than the amount owed), but the second account is unresolved. 
(GE 5, at 9) He contacted the creditor and attempted to settle the debt. The creditor 
offered to settle for less than the amount owed, but Applicant did not have the money to 
pay off the account. SOR ¶ 1.u is likely a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges Applicant’s delinquent student loan. He claimed he contacted 
the university in January 2011, but has made no payment arrangements. The debt is 
unresolved. Applicant claimed having no knowledge of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.g, 
2.h, 2.i, 2.j, 2.k, 2.l. 2.m, 2.s, 2.t, and 2.w. Some of them, he claimed, were removed 
from his credit report after he disputed them on an unspecified date. He testified that he 
disputed SOR ¶¶ 2.h, 2.j, and 2.l, and the credit bureau informed him the debts were his 
debts. Applicant believed he had paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x. However, in his 
answer to the SOR and at his hearing he stated that he had not paid the debt. Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence of contacts with creditors or disputed debts. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.y is unresolved. Applicant purchased a 2003 
Cadillac for $26,000 shortly after he separated from his wife in 2008. Initially, his car 
payment was $700 a month. After he missed one car payment, the loan interest 
5 
 
escalated and the monthly payments increased to the point where he could no longer 
afford the car payments. He voluntarily returned the car to the dealer in November 
2010. He claimed he received no collection notices, and he was not aware of any 
remaining balance on the car loan. In addition to the above debts, as of his hearing 
date, Applicant was $2,500 delinquent on his marital residence mortgage payments. He 
intends to include his residence mortgage in his future bankruptcy filing. 
 
On May 11, 2009, Applicant submitted the pending SCA. In response to Section 
22(b) (Financial Record), asking whether he was over 180 days delinquent on any loan 
or financial obligation, Applicant answered “No,” thereby failing to disclose the 
delinquent debts alleged under SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.d, 2.e, 2.j, and 2.l. Applicant explained 
that he made an innocent mistake. He did not remember some of the debts because of 
his state of mind and the personal problems he was going through. He believed he had 
paid some debts, and he claimed he was not aware of many of the medical debts.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s claims of innocent mistake are 
not credible. Even giving Applicant the benefit of the doubt about him not being aware of 
some of the alleged medical debts, Applicant knew that in 2008 he had improperly 
charged approximately $10,000 on his corporate credit card and that the corporate 
credit card account was delinquent (SOR ¶ 2.d). He also knew that he had two accounts 
with the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e. He settled one of the debts in April 2009, and the 
other remained delinquent because he could not afford to pay the settlement offered.  
 
Applicant also claimed he believed he was not delinquent on his debts because 
he was making payments through the bankruptcy trustee. Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence to show when he filed for bankruptcy protection, or of any 
payments made. Even if he did file the petition, he testified that the bankruptcy filing 
was dismissed for his failure to attend a meeting, and he was not making any payments 
to either the trustee or his creditors. 
 
SCA Section 20(d) asked Applicant whether in the last seven years he had been 
arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses (leaving out traffic offenses of 
less than $150). Applicant answered “No,” and he failed to disclose that in December 
2004, he was charged with a misdemeanor (driving under revocation-suspension), and 
that in April 2008, he was charged with speeding and fined $170. When asked why he 
failed to disclose the above information, Applicant explained that he misunderstood the 
SCA question. He believed that because the 2004 misdemeanor charge was dismissed, 
he did not have to disclose it. He failed to disclose the 2008 $170 speeding ticket 
because he did not recall that fine imposed was over $150 dollars. 
 
Applicant believes that he is doing all that he can do under his financial 
circumstances to resolve his delinquent debts. He claimed that his income is not 
sufficient for him to pay for his delinquent financial obligations and to pay for his and his 
family’s day-to-day living expenses. He intends to file for bankruptcy protection in the 
near future to resolve his financial predicament.  
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
7 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The record evidence establishes Applicant’s 18 delinquent debts (including five 
judgments), totaling approximately $26,457, some of which have been delinquent since 
2004. In 2008, Applicant charged approximately $10,000 for personal expenses on his 
corporate credit card knowing that such use was prohibited by company policy. He 
improperly used his corporate credit card because he had financial problems. AG ¶ 
19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”; and AG ¶ 19(d): “deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loans statements, and other intentional financial breaches of 
thrust” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
8 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Having considered all the mitigating conditions, I find that AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
fully apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(b) applies in 
part, but does not fully mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems 
are, to some extent, the result of circumstances beyond his control. His wife is ill and on 
long-term medical disability. He separated from his wife in 2008, and he is responsible 
for the day-to-day financial expenses of two households and the support of his two 
children. I did not consider Applicant’s resignation from companies N and L as 
circumstances beyond his control, as he voluntarily resigned from both jobs.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant was irresponsible in the handling 
of his finances. Applicant knew his wife was having medical problems since around 
2007. In 2008, Applicant and his wife separated. Shortly thereafter, he purchased a 
$26,000 car that he could not afford. That same year, he improperly charged 
approximately $10,000 on his corporate credit card weeks before he voluntarily 
resigned his position to take a lesser paying job with another company. He presented 
no documentary evidence of any efforts to repay this debt. 
 
 Applicant’s evidence fails to show that he made reasonable efforts to pay, settle, 
or resolve his delinquent debts. I considered the fact that his wife was hiding the 
medical debts and other correspondence from him. However, Applicant presented little 
documentary evidence of any effort to resolve the debts he knew about such as his 
corporate credit card and his personal credit cards. He disputed some debts that were 
validated by the credit bureau as his debts, and he has made little effort to resolve 
them. Applicant claimed he recently made contact with some of his creditors trying to 
settle the debts and establish payment plans. He failed to submit documentary evidence 
of such efforts.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) through 20(f) are not supported by the facts in this case and do not 
apply. Applicant has not received financial counseling. He presented no documentary 
evidence showing he disputed some of his debts, or that he has a valid reason to 
dispute the debts. There are no clear indications that his financial problems are under 
control or that he will have the ability to resolve them in the foreseeable future. On 
9 
 
balance, and considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s financial situation cast 
doubt on his current reliability and judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
In 2008, Applicant charged approximately $10,000 on personal expenses on his 
corporate credit card knowing that such use was prohibited by company policy. He then 
failed to pay those charges. Applicant also failed to disclose in his May 2009 SCA that 
he was over 180 days delinquent on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2,b, 2.d, and 2.e.  
 
Additionally, he failed to disclose that in the last seven years he was charged 
with driving under revocation-suspension (later dismissed), and that he was fined $170 
for speeding. Applicant claimed that he made an honest mistake when he failed to 
disclose the above information. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s 
explanations are not credible. He knew that he had financial problems, and was aware 
that some of his debts were delinquent and deliberately failed to disclose them. He used 
his company’s corporate credit card for personal expenses knowing such use was 
prohibited. 
 
Applicant admitted to a government investigator that he knew about such 
prohibition prior to using the corporate credit card. Notwithstanding, at his hearing, 
Applicant testified he had no knowledge of such prohibition, and that he was authorized 
by a supervisor to do so. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s testimony is 
not credible. He deliberately failed to disclose the above information in his SCA. 
 
Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his 2010 SCA triggers the applicability of 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities”; and AG ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” 
 
10 
 
After considering all the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions, I find none apply. 
Applicant’s falsifications are recent, serious offenses (felony-level).3
 
 His favorable 
evidence is not sufficient to mitigate his falsifications of the SCA.  
Whole-Person Concept 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. 
AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant receives credit for his naval service and for his many years working 
for different government contractors. He is going through a difficult situation because of 
his wife’s illness and he is caring for his two children. His financial situation was partially 
exacerbated by those family problems. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to show 
financial responsibility in the acquisition of his debts and in his efforts to resolve his 
financial situation. Moreover, Applicant deliberately falsified his 2009 SCA. The record 
evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations and personal conduct.  
Formal Finding 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1c:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.m,    Against Applicant 
    2.r – 2.t, and 2.w – 2.y: 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.n - 2.q,     
     2.u, and 2.v:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 See 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
