 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00029 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines C and F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 25, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 6, 2011. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 27, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on November 21, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant 
did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted into evidence without objections. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR, with explanations. I have 
incorporated her answer into my findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. She has worked for her present employer, a federal 
contractor since June 2010. She married in 1974 and divorced in 1977. She remarried 
in 2007. She has a grown daughter who is 35 years old.1
 
  
 Applicant was born on the island of Tobago. In 1970, she came to the United 
States on a visitor’s visa. It was later converted to a student visa, and then to permanent 
resident status. In 1978, she earned a bachelor’s degree. She applied to be a 
naturalized citizen of the United States in 1987 and was granted citizenship in 1988. 
Applicant returned to Tobago periodically to visit her mother. Her mother passed away 
in 2007, and Applicant’s trips there are less frequent. She has one brother who lives 
there and her other three siblings live in the United States. Her daughter was born in the 
United States and resides here.2
 
  
 In 2006, while working for a university, Applicant learned that she could become 
a dual-citizen of the United States and Tobago. It required that she apply for 
reinstatement of her Tobagonian citizenship. She believed it might help her interact 
culturally with some of the Caribbean students studying in the United States. Applicant 
went to the Tobagonian Consulate and applied for reinstatement of her citizenship. She 
did not receive any official documentation verifying her citizenship to Tobago was 
reinstated. She considered herself a dual citizen of Tobago and the United States. 
Applicant did not apply for a passport from Tobago. She has exclusively used her U.S. 
passport when traveling to Tobago. When she entered Tobago, she would go through 
the visitor line at the immigration entry point. She did not receive any benefits from 
Tobago when she requested her citizenship status be reinstated. Applicant learned later 
that dual citizenship status may have other implications that she was previously 
unaware of. She credibly stated she is willing to and intends to renounce her citizenship 
status with Tobago. She intends to go to the Tobago embassy and formally renounce 
it.3
 
.  
                                                          
1 Tr. 44-46. 
 
2 Tr. 46-52, 56-57, 62-63. 
 
3 Tr. 26-34, 52-66. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant had been gainfully employed and paying her bills until June 2009, 
when she lost her job due to downsizing. She then began receiving unemployment 
benefits and was working part-time as a consultant, but she was concerned that she 
would have difficulty making her monthly mortgage payments. She was unemployed 
until June 2010. She contacted her mortgage loan company and requested her loan be 
modified. The mortgage loan company agreed to forbearance for part of the monthly 
payment. She had been paying approximately $3,300 a month. The loan company 
agreed to modify the amount to $1,800 a month and the remaining $1,500 would be 
held as a debt until the final loan modification was completed. The debt in SOR ¶ 2.a 
($58,369) reflects the cumulative amount that she did not pay as part of the 
forbearance. Applicant and the mortgage loan company then worked to complete a final 
modification of the loan, which was accomplished in September 2011. The $58,369 that 
was owed was rolled into the new modified loan and a new payment agreement. 
Applicant now pays $1,900 a month. The interest rate was lowered and the length of the 
loan extended. All past due and delinquent amounts are included in the modified loan 
and Applicant is current in her monthly payments.4
 
 
 Applicant has no other delinquent or past due debts. She lives within her means. 
She files and pays her taxes on time. Since she began work, she is able to pay all of her 
bills. Her husband is employed and her daughter is self-sufficient.5
 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
4 Tr. 24-26, 34-44; AE D, E, F, G, H. 
 
5 Tr. 66-70. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern involving foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. 
This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; (3) 
accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits 
from a foreign country; (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship 
requirements; (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; (7) voting 
in a foreign election; and 
 
5 
 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American 
citizen. 
 
In 1988, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. In 2006, Applicant applied 
for reinstatement of her Tobagonian citizenship. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and the following under AG ¶ 11 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government.  
 
 Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based solely on her parents’ citizenship or birth 
in Tobago. In 2006, after she was a naturalized U.S. citizen, she applied for 
reinstatement of her Tobagonian citizenship. I find AG ¶¶ 11(a) and 11(c) do not apply. 
Applicant is willing and intends to renounce her dual citizenship with Tobago. She never 
obtained a Tobagonian passport and always traveled on her U.S. passport. She did not 
receive any benefits from Tobago when her citizenship was reinstated. I find AG ¶¶ 
11(b) applies. I find AG ¶¶ 11(e) and 11(f) do not apply because Applicant never 
obtained a Tobagonian passport, and she did not vote in a Tobagonian election since 
becoming a U.S. citizen.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant had a delinquent debt that was associated with her mortgage and a 
portion of it was not paid timely. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying condition.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant lost her job and was concerned about her mortgage payments. She 
contacted her mortgage company and they agreed to modify her loan. They modified 
her monthly payment and the difference between her original payment and the new 
payment was rolled into a new modified mortgage amount. Applicant was proactive 
regarding her mortgage to ensure she did not default on it. The delinquent amount 
alleged in the SOR is included in the modified mortgage and is not delinquent. I find AG 
¶ 20(a) applies because there was only one debt and Applicant was proactive in 
ensuring it was paid through a modification. This situation is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) applies because the conditions that resulted in the forbearance and modification 
were largely beyond Applicant’s control because she lost her job. She acted responsibly 
under the circumstances by contacting the loan company before her mortgage became 
delinquent and worked out a plan for modification. Applicant is paying the modified loan 
and the $58,369 is included in it. Applicant’s actions constitute a good-faith effort to 
ensure her creditor was paid. The problem is resolved and under control. I find AG ¶¶ 
20 (c) and 20 (d) apply.  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant applied for reinstatement 
of her Tobagonian citizenship in 2006. She believed it might be helpful when interacting 
with Caribbean students. She never applied for a passport and never received any 
benefits. She was unaware of the potential impact the dual citizenship would have on 
her security clearance application. She is willing and intends to renounce her dual 
citizenship status with Tobago. Applicant was unemployed for a year. During that time 
she was concerned about paying the monthly mortgage payments on her house. Before 
she defaulted on any payments she contacted her mortgage loan company and 
modified the loan. Her loan was modified and the amount that was part of the 
forbearance was included in the new loan. She is current with her payments. I find 
Applicant has met her burden of persuasion and her finances are not a security 
concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the Foreign 
Preference and Financial Considerations guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
