 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01884 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 7, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
6, 2011. The case was assigned to me on October 25, 2011. That same date, a Notice 
of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for November 16, 2011. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered seven exhibits which 
were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 7. Applicant testified and offered two 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on November 27, 2011.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits all the SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old program management analyst employed by a 
Department of Defense contractor seeking to maintain her security clearance. She has 
worked for her current employer since December 27, 1988. She has held a security 
clearance for over 22 years with no security violations. She is engaged. She has two 
adult daughters. (Tr. 26-27; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that she had 
several delinquent debts. The SOR alleged two delinquent accounts consisting of an 
$11,000 collection account owed for a timeshare (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a $278 cell phone 
account placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
On August 25, 2011, Applicant settled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $3,245. 
This debt was for a timeshare that she and her fiancé purchased in 2006. They stopped 
making payments towards the timeshare and negotiated a pay-off settlement. The 
timeshare was located out of the United States in an area where there has been 
significant drug-related violence. (Tr. 30, 33-37; Response to SOR; AE A at 1-5) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was a cell phone account that Applicant opened 
for her daughter’s use. Her daughter transferred cell phone accounts without telling her 
and did not pay off the account. Applicant learned of the debt when she attempted to 
get a new phone. She immediately paid the debt when she became aware of it. This 
account was paid before the SOR was issued. (Tr. 28-30; Response to SOR; AE A at 6-
8)  
  
Although not alleged in the SOR, during the hearing, Applicant indicated that she 
and her fiancé purchased a second home in 2006 for $650,000. Their mortgage was an 
adjustable rate mortgage. They initially were able to afford the payments. In 2008, 
Applicant and her fiancé ended their relationship and he moved out of the house. (They 
subsequently reconciled.) She was unable to afford the house payments on her own. 
She put the house up for sale in April 2008. She was unable to sell or rent the house. 
She moved out of the house in May 2009 and moved back into her first home. The 
value of the second house had decreased to $350,000 because of the decline in the 
housing market. Applicant approached the mortgage lender to inquire about short 
selling the property. She was current on the mortgage payments at that time. She was 
advised that she needed to be delinquent on her mortgage payments in order to qualify 
for a short sale. She followed this advice and her second home was sold at a short sale 
in June 2010.  Applicant reported the pending short sale to her security officer on March 
25, 2010. The lender cancelled the remainder of the debt after the short sale. (Tr. 39-46; 
Gov 2; Gov 3)  
 
In response to interrogatories, dated May 9, 2011, Applicant completed a 
personal financial statement. Her net monthly income was $5,478. Her total monthly 
 
3 
 
 
debt was $5,175.93. During the hearing, Applicant testified that the personal financial 
statement was mostly accurate. She indicated she took out a 401(k) loan and paid down 
the $17,105 balance on a credit card to $6,000 because of high interest rates. All of her 
accounts are current. She has approximately $400 left over each month after expenses. 
(Tr. 50-52; AE 2 at 10-11) 
 
Applicant provided numerous awards and certificates of appreciation that she 
earned during her career. She also actively volunteers in her community. (AE B) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant  
encountered difficulties meeting her financial obligations beginning in 2006. The SOR 
alleged two debts totaling $11,278.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
5 
 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply:  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies with respect to circumstances 
(downturn in the real estate market) that resulted in the short sale of Applicant’s second 
home. Although this debt was not alleged in the SOR, more than likely because 
Applicant resolved the debt before the SOR was issued, it was likely a contributing 
factor towards her other financial difficulties. However, this mitigating condition is given 
less weight because Applicant’s decision to purchase a second home and a timeshare 
in 2006 was within her control.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant resolved her delinquent accounts and her financial problems 
appear to be under control.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant encountered financial problems, but 
resolved all delinquent accounts. She demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve her 
debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 23-year 
employment history with a defense contractor. She possessed a security clearance for 
the duration her employment without any security violations. Applicant encountered 
financial problems when she and her fiancé over-extended themselves in 2006 when 
they purchased a second home and a timeshare. A temporary break up and a downturn 
in the real estate market aggravated Applicant’s financial situation. After making efforts 
to sell or rent the second home, she was ultimately able to sell the home in a short sale.  
Applicant resolved all delinquent accounts in the SOR. Her financial situation is now 
stable. All her accounts are current. She demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve her 
delinquent accounts. Security concerns are mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is   
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
