                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01470 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concern. His financial problem 
was due to the economic downturn that caused his business to fail and his house to 
lose half its value. He has handled his financial situation in a responsible manner and 
established that his finances are under control. However, he failed to mitigate the 
Foreign Influence concern raised by his significant connections to Russia. His wife’s 
parents and her best friends are resident-citizens of Russia. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 23, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made 
a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The 
basis for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that alleges the 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline F (Financial 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Considerations). Applicant submitted a detailed response on September 26, 2011 
(Answer). He denied five of the seven debts alleged under Guideline F, admitted all the 
allegations under Guideline B, and requested a hearing. 
 
 On November 1, 2011, Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for December 7, 2011, via video 
teleconference.2 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, which were admitted into evidence without objection.3 Department Counsel 
also submitted GE I through X for administrative notice regarding the Russian 
Federation (Russia).4 The Government stipulated that the five debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
2.a, 2.b, 2.d, 2.e, and 2.g had been satisfied. Applicant appeared at the hearing, called 
his wife as a witness, and testified on his own behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through R, which were admitted into evidence without objection.5 The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on December 14, 2011.6 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He was born overseas on a U.S. military installation 
where his father was stationed with the U.S. Army (USA). He is married with a two-year-
old child. He graduated high school in 1979 and has taken some college level courses.7 
He served in the submarine forces of the U.S. Navy from 1980 to 1988, separating with 
an honorable discharge. He held a security clearance the entire time without incident,8 
and was involved in a number of significant operations that “contributed significantly to 
the overall national security.”9  
 
In August 2007, Applicant started working for his former employer, a government 
contractor. He was granted an interim security clearance and handled classified 
2 As a time-management tool, I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties to serve one 
another and me their anticipated exhibits prior to the hearing. See Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 GE 4 is Applicant’s third interrogatory response. It is a 255-page document. I have inserted 
page numbers for ease of reference in case appellate review is required.  
 
4 Department Counsel submitted a summary of facts from GE I - X that the Government asks I 
take administrative notice. See HE II. The facts administratively noticed are set forth in my findings of fact. 
 
5 AE A – F were originally submitted by Applicant with his Answer. Following the hearing, 
Applicant submitted his prepared remarks that he read into the record. As there was no objection, I 
admitted this document as AE S. 
 
6 I made pen-and-ink changes at 15, 24-26, 34, and 75 to correct minor typographical errors.  
 
7 GE 1. (Applicant has been married twice before and has two adult children); GE 2, Subject 
Interview, April 29, 2010 (4/10 SI); AE S. 
 
8 GE 1 at 24-25, 56-57; GE 4 at 253 (DD Form 214); AE S; Tr. at 133. 
 
9 GE 4 at 254. 
 
 
3 
 
 
information without incident. His employment contract ended in October 2009, and he 
was able to secure another government contracting job. He has been with his current 
employer since October 2009. His access to classified information, which was granted 
to him on an interim basis in 2007, was denied when the SOR was issued in August 
2011.10 His family, co-workers, and friends all hold him in high esteem and recommend 
him for a clearance.11 A retired Command Sergeant Major, USA, who has worked with 
Applicant for the past 18 months, states: 
 
I have the utmost respect for (Applicant) as a trusted friend and a great 
American. He is one of the very few people that I know who inspires 
courage, hard work and is driven by commitment. He is a person of 
impeccable character, integrity and can-do attitude. In addition, he is a 
patriot of the highest order . . . I have full confidence in him as an 
American and I would trust him with my life.12 
 
Financial Concerns 
 
 Applicant purchased his home in October 2006 in pursuit of the American dream 
of home ownership. The home cost $307,000. At the time, Applicant was self-employed, 
operating a niche business restoring classic cars. The business generated sufficient 
income to cover Applicant’s mortgage until February 2007 when “the recession hit, and 
people weren’t paying their invoices . . . and it started putting (Applicant) in a position 
where (he) couldn’t pay (his) bills . . .” 13 Applicant’s dire financial situation was further 
complicated due to costly repairs to his new home. He started looking for a steady job 
and filled out several employment applications.14 
 
 By the summer of 2007, Applicant had exhausted his savings trying to keep the 
business afloat and making some of the needed repairs to his home. He was offered a 
position with a government contractor, but the job required him to move out of state. He 
was unable to rent his home and could not sell it due to the collapse of the local housing 
market, which had robbed the home of half its value in less than a year’s time. As he 
had no other job prospects, Applicant accepted the out-of-state job offer. He rented a 
room for $400 and kept his expenses as low as possible, in order to maintain two 
households. He turned to credit cards to pay his bills, including his mortgage. He 
eventually fell behind on his credit card payments and defaulted on his mortgage.15 
                                                          
10 GE 1; Tr. at 15, 30-31, 47, 102-104, 133. 
 
11 AE G. 
 
12 Id. at 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 31. 
 
14 Tr. at 31-34, 45-55. 
 
15 Tr. at 32, 47-48, 53-55, 63; GE 2, Subject Interview, November 8, 2010 (11/10 SI).  
 
 
4 
 
 
R 
ebt.   
se debts for 
several months and has made a good-faith effort to resolve the other debt.  
                                                          
Applicant at first tried to resolve his mortgage debt by securing the services of a 
private firm that advertised its ability to modify mortgages. He spent about nine months 
and paid the firm $3,500 to no avail. He then worked with the bank directly. He 
submitted multiple loan modification requests and offered the bank a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure, but the bank rejected these offers. He then attempted to short-sale the 
property. The second offer for $165,000 was accepted by the bank and the house sold 
in March or April 2011.16 Applicant submitted documentary proof that his mortgage 
obligation, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.g, has been satisfied.17  
 
 Applicant has resolved or initiated a good-faith effort to satisfy his other debts. He 
secured the services of a debt settlement firm (DSF) in October 2010.18 With the DSF’s 
assistance, Applicant has resolved four debts, including three that were listed in the 
SOR.19 Applicant submitted documentary proof that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 
2.b, and 2.d were “settled in full” between January and March 2011.20  
 
Applicant has also negotiated a settlement of the credit card debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 2.f. He has been making the monthly payments agreed to with the creditor for the last 
five months.21 With the assistance of the DSF, he has contacted the creditor for the 
debt alleged in ¶ 2.c and has made reasonable offers to settle the debt. He will finish 
paying the DSF’s monthly service fee of $231 at the end of this month and will apply 
these funds to satisfy the debt alleged in ¶ 2.c. He submitted documentary proof that the 
DSF has contacted this creditor and is attempting to settle the last remaining SO
22d
 
 In total, Applicant has satisfied five of the seven SOR debts or approximately 
$312,000 of the debt alleged in the SOR. He satisfied or started paying six of the seven 
debts prior to the SOR being issued. The amount past due on the two remaining SOR 
debts is less than $15,000. He has been consistently paying on one of the
16 Tr. at 33-36; GE 3.  
 
17 AE K. See also Tr. at 18 and 125 (Government stipulates that Applicant satisfied his mortgage 
debt); GE 1 at 57-61 (applicant fully discloses mortgage debt on security clearance application); GE 4 at 
41-187 and 217-235 (applicant’s documented efforts to resolve mortgage debt). 
 
18 GE 4 at 6-12.  
 
19 AE L – O.  
 
20 AE Q. See also Tr. at 18 and 125 (Government stipulates that these three debts, for a 
combined total of $14,033, were paid); GE 4 at 13-15 (¶ 2.b), 16-17 (¶ 2.d), 20-24 (¶ 2.a), 25-40 (chart 
with settlements and proof of payments). 
 
21 AE J and AE Q (settlement agreement and proof of payments); Tr. at 41, 58-59. See also Tr. at 
18 and 125 (Government stipulates that Applicant has been paying the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.f in 
accordance with settlement agreement).  
 
22 Tr. at 41, 58-59; AE R (DSF promises to resolve debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c within 30-45 days).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant continues to live a modest lifestyle. His current salary is $73,000 per 
year. He has a part time job that brings in some extra money, which he uses to pay his 
debts. He sold his car, because he no longer needs it to get to work, and used the sale 
proceeds to pay his debts. He also used his tax refund from last year to satisfy some of 
his past-due debts. He manages his finances closely and has about $500 in disposable 
income each month to address any contingencies that might arise, including his wife’s 
on-going medical bills. He does not have any credit cards and has not accumulated any 
other debt.23 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant met his wife in 2003 through an internet dating website. She was born, 
educated, and lived most of her life until recently in Russia. She was a highly successful 
professional working in the banking industry in Russia before immigrating to the U.S. 
After a lengthy long-distance relationship, she married Applicant in 2008. Applicant 
visited his future wife in Russia before and after they married. He made certain to report 
his foreign travel to his previous employer’s security office. Even though his current 
employer does not have such a reporting requirement, he continued this practice at his 
current job.24 He fully disclosed his foreign travel and contacts on his security clearance 
application and subsequent background interviews.25 He continues to adhere to the 
Navy saying that “loose lips, sinks ships.”26 
 
 Applicant’s wife returned to Russia after they got married in 2008. In light of 
Applicant’s financial situation, they could not afford to lose her salary from her well-
paying job in Russia. She helped him financially to pay his past-due debts, sending him 
approximately $30,000.27  
 
Applicant’s daughter was born in 2009 in Russia. She became a dual citizen of 
Russia and the U.S. Applicant’s wife and his daughter immigrated to the U.S. in May 
2010. Applicant’s wife is a permanent resident of the U.S. She sold her property in 
Russia and is transferring the proceeds from the sale of the property, about $300,000, 
to the U.S. She plans to use the money to purchase the family’s home here in the U.S. 
Once the money is transferred to her bank account in the U.S., she will have no real or 
personal property left in Russia. The money is currently in a Russian bank account.28 
                                                          
23 Tr. at 42-45, 59-63; GE 2, 11/10 SI; GE 3; GE 4 at 245-252 (tax return). See also GE 4 at 185-
186, 213-215, 221, and 233.  
 
24 Tr. at 64-67, 77-79, 82-83, 86-87, 106, 113; GE 2, 11/10 SI. 
 
25 GE 1 at 40-45, 48-53; GE 2. 
 
26 Tr. at 19. 
 
27 Tr. at 77-79, 95; GE 1 at 48; GE 2, 11/10 SI. 
 
28 Tr. at 79-82, 85, 96-98, 113-118. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s in-laws are residents and citizens of Russia. They are both retired 
and receive a pension from the Russian government. His mother-in-law is bedridden, 
after suffering a stroke. His father-in-law used to work for the Russian government. His 
in-laws currently reside in a town that is connected to the Russian military and requires 
special permission from the Russian government to enter. Applicant was denied 
permission to enter this town when he was dating his wife because he was a foreigner. 
Applicant’s wife submitted an application to visit her parents after her mother had a 
stroke. She was denied permission to enter the town, where she had been born and 
raised, because she had married Applicant, a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s wife was aware 
that the Russian government might deny her permission to visit her parents if she 
married Applicant, and had discussed this possibility with Applicant prior to their 
marriage. They do not provide financial support to her parents. Her father did provide 
them about $13,000 to start a college fund for their daughter. Applicant’s wife speaks 
with her parents on a weekly basis.29  
 
 Applicant’s wife has two close friends who are residents and citizens of Russia. 
One is her best friend who helped her pick her child’s name. The other, was the 
bridesmaid at her wedding. She has visited extensively with both of these friends when 
she has traveled to Russia and when she lived in Russia. She continues to speak to 
them on a regular basis.30 
 
 Applicant’s wife has a sister and three cousins who are also residents and 
citizens of Russia. She has not spoken to her sister in over four years and rarely speaks 
to her cousins.31 
 
 U.S.-Russian relations have gone through dramatic changes over the past 
century: from military alliance during World War II, to outright hostility during the Cold 
War, to its current state of mutual cooperation in areas of shared interest.32 However, 
several areas of concern regarding Russia remain. One such area of concern is 
Russia’s human rights record, which the U.S. Department of State notes is “uneven and 
poor in some areas.”33 The judiciary is often manipulated by the authorities and the 
Russian government continues to infringe upon its citizen’s rights.34 Another area of 
vital concern is Russia’s intelligence gathering history targeting the United States, which 
remains active and strong.35 
29 Tr. at 67-77, 106-111, 119, 131-132; GE 2, 11/10 SI. 
 
30 Tr. at 87-89; GE 1 at 42-44. 
 
31 Tr. at 72, 87, 89-93, 111-113, 118; GE 1. 
 
32 GE IX. 
 
33 GE IX at 7. See also GE X; Tr. at 84-85. 
 
34 GE IX and X. 
 
35 See generally GE I – GE VIII. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s wife does not intend to return to Russia. She wants to build a life in 
the United States with Applicant and their daughter.36 When asked at hearing whether 
he had ever considered moving to Russia during the deepest hours of his financial 
trouble, Applicant responded as follows: 
 
Well sir, to be honest with you, I was born in Germany to military parents, 
and . . . I remember when I landed in the United States at that particular 
point, I kissed the ground . . . I could never give up what we have in the 
United States. . . I’ve been probably as patriotic as anybody could ever be 
as far as, you know, how I feel about the United States of America. . . I 
can tell you one thing . . . I have no desire whatsoever to go to Russia and 
work, or live, or anything like that.37 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
36 Tr. at 93-95, 120-122, 132; GE 1 at 42-44. 
 
37 Tr. at 98-100. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information Applicant’s past indebtedness raises this concern 
and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”38 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. I have considered all the mitigating 
conditions, and find that the following were established by the evidence:  
 
38 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problem was due to matters beyond his control. His 
business failed as a direct result of the general economic downturn. He was then forced 
to take a job in another state that exacerbated his financial situation.39 He could not sell 
his house because it had lost half its value due to the housing market collapse. He 
turned to credit cards to pay his bills, including his mortgage. When faced with daunting 
financial debt, Applicant did not simply walk away from his financial obligations or use 
the businesses failure as an excuse not to pay his debts. Instead, he worked with his 
lender, sold his home, and thereby satisfied his mortgage obligation – the largest debt 
listed in the SOR. He was able to negotiate settlements in good-faith with the vast 
majority of his other overdue creditors. He has reduced his debt from over $300,000 to 
roughly $15,000. He is paying one of his two remaining overdue creditors, and provided 
documentary proof that he has made good-faith efforts to resolve the other past-due 
debt.40 Although he has not taken a financial counseling course, Applicant’s actions 
demonstrate that his financial situation is under control. He sold his car and used the 
sale proceeds, as well as his tax refund, to repay his debts. He does not have credit 
cards and lives modestly. His recent financial problem was a blimp in an otherwise long 
history of demonstrated financial prudence. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations concern.  
39 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 09-08108 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011) (applicant’s voluntary 
decision to change jobs that paid less money was not a matter beyond his control.).  
 
40 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-01978 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2011) (after getting into financial 
trouble, applicant simply walked away from his financial obligations). See also ISCR Case No. 10-09511 
(Nov. 17, 2011) (adverse decision upheld because applicant failed to demonstrate that he acted in a 
responsible fashion in resolving significant debt that was, in part, due to business downturn).  
 
 
10 
 
 
l ties.  
                                                          
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6, as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
In addressing the foreign influence concern, the Appeal Board has repeatedly 
held that “the foreign government involved, the intelligence gathering history of that 
government, and the presence of terrorist activity” in that country, as well as “[t]he 
country’s human rights record,” are all key factors an Administrative Judge must 
consider.41 An applicant’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign 
influence concern, including ties based upon an applicant’s in-laws.42 At the same time, 
there is no per se rule against applicants with familial ties to a foreign country, even 
hostile countries. Instead, an applicant with familial ties to a hostile country, such as 
Russia, bears a “very heavy burden” in mitigating the foreign influence concern raised 
by their familia 43
 
Applicant’s strong ties to Russia, through his spouse’s parents and friends, 
coupled with the Russian government’s human rights record and its intelligence 
41 ISCR Case No. 09-06831 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2011) (favorable decision reversed, in part, 
because the judge failed to consider the nature of the Russian government and its intelligence gathering 
activities against the U.S.). 
 
42 Id. (“Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and residents of Russia. In-laws represent a class of 
persons who are contemplated by the Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of 
common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”). See also ISCR 
Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011) (“There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has 
ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”). 
 
43 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 10 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) (“As a matter of common sense and 
sound risk management under the ‘clearly consistent with the national interest’ standard, an applicant 
with immediate family members living in a country hostile to the United States should not be granted a 
security clearance without a very strong showing that those family ties do not pose a security risk.”). See 
also ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (“an applicant with family members in a country that is hostile to the 
U.S. bears a “very heavy burden” to show that the family members are not a means of coercion or 
exploitation.”); ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (reaffirming “very heavy burden” 
standard under current guidelines).  
 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
gathering history against the U.S. raises the above concern.44 Applicant’s foreign 
familial ties also establish the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 sets forth a number of mitigating conditions that could mitigate the foreign 
influence concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and find the following 
warrant further discussion:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concern. His in-laws still reside in 
Russia and both receive a pension from the government. They reside in a town that is 
inaccessible to the outside world without special permission from the Russian 
government. Applicant’s in-laws are especially vulnerable to the whims of the Russian 
government. In light of the nature of the country at issue and his wife’s close 
relationship with her parents, AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s deep, longstanding relationship and loyalties to the U.S. are self-
evident. He served this nation during the height of the Cold War and has had access to 
44 The wife’s three cousins do not raise a security concern under Guideline B and, thus, SOR ¶ 
1.c is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
classified information for years without incident. He has fully disclosed his foreign travel 
and connections throughout the security clearance process. He even reported his 
foreign travel to his current employer when there was no such requirement. His wife 
demonstrated her commitment to Applicant and their new life together when she 
married him knowing that it would likely preclude her from visiting her parents. However, 
I cannot overlook the fact that Applicant’s spouse just recently immigrated to the U.S., 
her parents and closest friends remain in Russia, and her life savings, some $300,000, 
are currently in a Russian bank account.45 In weighing this evidence and resolving the 
issue of whether Applicant met his burden in demonstrating that he can be expected to 
resolve a conflict of interest in favor of the U.S., I am required to resolve any doubt 
raised by Applicant’s significant connections to Russia in favor of national security.46 AG 
¶ 8(b) does not apply. Applicant’s strong ties to Russia remain a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
As noted above, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. This is generally referred to as the “whole-person” concept. An 
administrative judge should consider the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).47 In weighing 
these whole-person factors in a foreign influence case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still 
pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, . . . [e]ven good people can pose a 
security risk because of facts and circumstances not under their control. 
For example, . . . an applicant with good character and personal integrity 
can pose a security risk because the applicant has close relatives in a 
country hostile to the United States.48 
45 This foreign financial interest was not alleged as a concern. However, as Applicant was on 
notice that his ties to Russia, through his spouse, were at issue, I will consider this information in 
assessing the mitigation evidence and whole-person factors. ISCR Case No. 09-06770 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 
2002); ISCR Case No. 01-07656 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2002). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00922 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Nov. 3, 2011) (“It is appropriate for a Judge to consider conduct and matters not alleged in the SOR 
for such limited purposes as evaluating a claim of extenuation, mitigation or changed circumstances, and 
when weighing relevant and material information under the whole person concept.”).  
 
46 AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
47 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
48 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 9-10 (emphasis added). 
 
 
13 
 
 
                                                          
 I have considered and given due weight to all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant has served this nation, both in the military and as a 
government contractor, for over twelve years combined. He has had access to classified 
information and has never mishandled or otherwise compromised such information. He 
faced financial ruin due to the current economic downturn. Instead of moving to Russia 
with his wife and leaving his financial trouble behind, he stayed and resolved his 
financial problem in a responsible manner. However, this favorable evidence, as well as 
the other mitigating record evidence, does not outweigh the foreign influence concern.  
 
 At the same time, this adverse determination is not a comment on Applicant’s 
patriotism, but merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways 
when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a family 
member.49 Accordingly, in light of the security risk posed by Applicant’s strong ties to 
Russia, through his wife’s parents and her close friends, I resolve the concern raised by 
this situation against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:         Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c:           For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d:           Against Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.g:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
49 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
