                                                            
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                   
                                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
        
                      
In the matter of: )
)
)      ISCR No. 11-03433
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On July 13, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline D
(Sexual Behavior) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The actions was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended;  Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented tin September 2006. 
  
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the record. The
Government requested a hearing pursuant to proper procedure. A notice of hearing was
issued on October 28, 2011, and I heard the case on December 6, 2011. Department
Counsel offered four exhibits (GE) 1-4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
submitted three exhibits (AE) A-C and testified on his own behalf. He also presented the
testimony of one witness. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on
December 14, 2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I
find Applicant has not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns raised. Security
clearance is denied.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 41 years old. He received his undergraduate degree in 2007. He is
currently completing a master’s degree in information systems management. (AE A) He
has held a security clearance, including top secret since 1998. He has worked for his
current employer since 1997. He is married and has two children. (GE 1)
Applicant’s employer sponsored him for an SCI upgrade in August 2008. He
completed his security clearance application and was interviewed by OPM in October
2008. During the interview, Applicant admitted to engaging in solicitation of prostitutes
“less than once a month from 2003 until 2008.”  Applicant was denied the SCI upgrade
based on the involvement with prostitution from 2003 until 2008. He appealed the
decision and believed that the decision was overturned, but he does not have the
documentation to support his belief.  
Applicant admitted that he solicited prostitutes from December 2003. He
continued this activity until 2008. He spent approximately $10,000 for this activity. (Tr.
36) Applicant met them at their home or in a hotel room. He explained that he started
the activity when he was on work travel by going online and looking for massage
services. He met a prostitute during his work trip. 
He told the investigator that he would surf web sites for postings that advertised,
“massage services,” and contained key words such as “consenting adults.” He paid
$100 to $300 for massage services, oral sex, and vaginal sex. He at first stated that he
engaged in this activity when he had a “day off.” When he spoke to the investigator in
2008, Applicant stated he would like to discontinue the “bad habit”, but he believed that
there was the possibility that he would solicit them in the future when he had a “day off.”
(GE 2)
During a series of polygraphs dating from 2003, Applicant did not discuss his use
of prostitutes when asked questions about his lifestyle. He notes that he was given a
polygraph six times.  During his 2008 polygraph,  Applicant recalls that the polygrapher
believed that Applicant was not disclosing something that had to do with criminal
activity. At that point, Applicant responded that for several years, he contacted various
agencies via the internet and made appointments to meet women at a hotel or
residence. Applicant referred to the services as “massage services.”
Applicant did not disclose his activity with prostitutes to his wife until after he
received the SOR in July 2011. Applicant’s wife testified that they sought marriage
counseling to heal the relationship. However, after calling one number and not getting
the correct contact information, they decided to seek “spiritual healing.” They became
members of a church. (Tr. 61) After their 2011 baptism, they will have access to
counseling services from the church. (AE C) Applicant explained that she understood
that her husband of 20 years was soliciting services from escort services from 2003 until
2008. 
At the hearing, Applicant stressed that he has never had a security violation in 14
years. He believed his activity was not a major crime, and it was against his marriage
and not really a concern for his security clearance. He elaborated that he has taken his
work seriously since 1997 and has operated in a professional manner. He takes his
responsibilities seriously. Applicant has worked for numerous agencies as a contractor.
He now realizes that the guidelines that he has violated are serious in nature. At the
time of the misconduct, he did not believe he was putting his clearance in jeopardy. He
believes that he has mitigated the concern because he told the truth about the
prostitution in 2008 and his wife now knows about the situation. Applicant believes this
eliminates any vulnerability. He discussed the SOR with his current security officer. He
states that he has not engaged in activities of this nature since 2008. He apologizes for
his actions, and vows to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and sensitivity of classified
information.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance. Indeed the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of
a number of variables in considering the “whole-person” concept. It recognizes that we
should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions, motivations and various
other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature
thinking, and careful analysis.  No unfavorable personnel security clearance or access
determination may be made without granting the individual concerned the procedural
benefits set forth in the Regulation.  
In all adjudications the protection of the national security is the paramount
consideration. Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
to classified information is resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel . . . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern as:
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has
been prosecuted;
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a
personality disorder;
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion
or judgment.
Applicant admitted that he engaged the services of prostitutes from 2003 until
2008. At the time he held a security clearance. Applicant was actively engaged in
soliciting prostitutes when he was on work trips. He did not tell his wife until after he
received the SOR in July 2011. His wife did not know about his activity with prostitutes
from 2003 until 2008. 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature;
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.
Applicant’s behavior is not mitigated. He has only recently acknowledged the
behavior. He has not received counseling. His wife has just learned about the activity,
but there are others who do not know. The behavior was not isolated in nature. He did
not believe it was a major crime that affected his security clearance. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
Applicant’s behavior and misconduct have been addressed under the sexual
behavior guideline. The SOR alleged personal conduct security concerns based on
Applicant’s use of prostitutes from 2003 until 2008. Applicant used poor judgment and
questionable behavior that is criminal in nature. He did not disclose the behavior until
after a series of polygraphs in 2008. AG 16(e) and (g) apply.  He was not certain that he
would not continue his “bad habit.”  The security concern under personal conduct is not
mitigated. He has minimized the seriousness of the conduct. He recently expressed
sorrow because he needs his security clearance. He told his wife after receiving the
SOR in 2011. Although he has attempted to heal his marriage, he does not seem aware
that he has violated a government trust. I have doubts about his reliability and judgment.
None of the mitigating conditions apply under these circumstances. 
“Whole-Person” Analysis 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all
the circumstances. An administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a married man with two
children. He has held a security clearance since 1998. He worked as a contractor for
numerous government agencies. From 2003 until 2008, he engaged in the use of
prostitutes. He even did this while on a work trip. He did not disclose this behavior until
after a series of polygraphs in 2008. 
Applicant acknowledges that he violated his marriage vows. He is trying to heal
his marriage. He and his wife go to church. They have recently been baptized. They
plan to attend counseling. He states now that what he did was wrong. He believes he is
a trustworthy individual who has upheld the responsibilities of his profession. However,
given the fact that Applicant held a security clearance for so many years, I have doubts
that he did not understand the seriousness of his activities.   
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance and access to classified information. For
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising
from the above referenced guidelines. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are :
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                                   
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge
